(413) CONTINUATION OF THE NOMINATION OF HON. SONIA SOTOMAYOR, TO BE AN ASSO- CIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES THURSDAY, JULY 16, 2009 U.S. SENATE, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, Washington, D.C. The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:33 a.m., in room SH–216, Hart Senate Office Building, Hon. Patrick J. Leahy, Chairman of the Committee, presiding. Present: Senators Leahy, Kohl, Feinstein, Feingold, Schumer, Durbin, Cardin, Whitehouse, Klobuchar, Kaufman, Specter, Franken, Sessions, Hatch, Grassley, Kyl, Graham, Cornyn, and Coburn. Chairman LEAHY. Judge, thank you. Judge Sotomayor, welcome back to the Committee for a fourth day. If this seems long, it is a day more than either Chief Justice Roberts or Justice Alito was called upon to testify. But you seem to have weathered it well, and I hope the Senators have, too. Yesterday we completed the extended first round of questions, and an additional eight Senators got approximately halfway through a follow-up round. This morning we can continue and hopefully conclude. Senator Kyl is recognized next for 20 minutes, or as I say with hope springing eternal—I keep saying ‘‘up to 20 minutes.’’ Nobody is required to use the full 20 minutes, but I would hasten to add, everybody is certainly entitled to. Senator Kyl. Senator KYL. Mr. Chairman, before I begin, for those who are watching this on television, I would just note that I don’t think we put Judge Sotomayor on the hot seat with our questions, but we certainly did with the temperature in this room yesterday, and for that I apologize. And I note that it could get a little steamy this morning, too. I know it is cold back there, but it is not at all cool where we are. Chairman LEAHY. If I could respond—— Senator KYL. If there is ever a question about Judge Sotomayor’s stamina in a very hot room, that question has been dispelled with- out any doubt whatsoever. Chairman LEAHY. If I might—and I will ask them to set the clock back to the 20 minutes so this does not go into your time—it is really an interesting thing, because anybody who has gone up VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00425 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 414 where the press are, it is like an icebox up there. And I am hoping we can get this—but at least the microphone is working. I want to thank Senator Sessions for offering me his microphone yesterday, but that did not work. And I want to thank Senator Franken for letting me use his. So if we start the clock back over so I do not take this out of Sen- ator Kyl’s time, Senator Kyl, please go ahead, sir. Senator KYL. Thank you, and good morning, Judge. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Good morning. Senator KYL. In response to one of Senator Sessions’ questions on Tuesday about the Ricci case, you stated that your actions in the case were controlled by established Supreme Court precedent. You also said that a variety of different judges on the appellate court were looking at the case in light of established Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedent. And you said that the Su- preme Court was the only body that had the discretion and the power to decide how these tough issues should be decided. Those are all quotations from you. Now, I have carefully reviewed the decision, and I think the re- ality is different. No Supreme Court case had decided whether re- jecting an employment test because of its racial results would vio- late the civil rights laws. Neither the Supreme Court’s majority in Ricci nor the four dissenting judges discussed or even cited any cases that addressed the question. In fact, the Court in its opinion even noted—and I am quoting here—that ‘‘this action presents two provisions of Title VII to be interpreted and reconciled with few, if any, precedents in the court of appeals discussing the issue.’’ In other words, not only did the Supreme Court not identify any Supreme Court cases that were on point; it found few, if any, lower court opinions that even addressed the issue. Isn’t it true that you were incorrect in your earlier statement that you were bound by established Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedent when you voted each time to reject the fire- fighters’ civil rights complaint? STATEMENT OF HON. SONIA SOTOMAYOR, TO BE AN ASSO- CIATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, I was—let me place the Ricci deci- sion back in context. The issue was whether or not employees who were a member of a disparately impacted group had a right under existing precedent to bring a lawsuit. Did they have a right to bring a lawsuit on the basis of prima facie case and what would that consist of? That was established Second Circuit precedent and had been, at least up to that point, concluded from Supreme Court precedents describing the initial burden that employees had. That was—— Senator KYL. Well, are you speaking here—you said had the right to bring the lawsuit. It is not a question of standing. There was a question of summary judgment. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Exactly. Exactly, which is, when you speak about a right to bring a lawsuit, I mean what’s the minimum amount of good-faith evidence do they have to actually file the com- plaint. And established precedent said you can make out, an em- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00426 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 415 ployee, a prima facie case of a violation of Title VII under just merely by—not ‘‘merely.’’ That’s denigrating it. By showing a dis- parate impact. Then the city was faced with the choice of, OK, we’re now facing two claims, one—— Senator KYL. If I could just interrupt, we only have 20 minutes here, and I am aware of the facts of the case. I know what the claims were. The question I asked was very simple. You said that you were bound by Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedent. What was it? There is no Supreme Court precedent, and as the Court itself noted, they could find few, if any, Second Circuit prece- dents. Judge SOTOMAYOR. The question was the precedent that existed and whether, viewing it, one would view this as the city discrimi- nating on the basis of race or the city concluding that because it was unsure that its test actually avoided disparate impact but still tested for necessary qualifications, was it discriminating on the basis of race by not certifying the test? Senator KYL. So you disagree with the Supreme Court’s charac- terization of the precedents available to decide the case? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It’s not that I disagree. The question was a more focused one that the Court was looking at, which was say- ing—not more focused. It was a different look. It was saying, OK, you have got these precedents. It says employees can sue the city. The city is now facing liability. It is unsure whether it can defeat that liability. And so it decides not to certify the test and see if it could come up with one that would still measure the necessary qualifications—— Senator KYL. Let me interrupt again because you are not getting to the point of my question, and I know as a good judge, if I were arguing a case before you, you would say, ‘‘That is all fine and dandy, counsel, but answer my question.’’ Isn’t it true that—two things—first, the result of your decision was to grant summary judgment against these parties? In other words, it wasn’t just a question of whether they had the right to sue. You actually granted a summary judgment against the parties. And, second, that there was no Supreme Court precedent that re- quired that result? And I am not sure what the Second Circuit precedent is. The Supreme Court said ‘‘few, if any.’’ And I don’t know what the precedent would be. I am not necessarily going to ask you to cite the case, but was there a case? And if so, what is it? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It was the ones that we discussed yesterday, the Bushey line of cases that talked about the prima facie case and the obligations of the city in terms of defending lawsuits claiming disparate impact. And so the question then became: How do you view the city’s action? Was it—and that’s what the district court had done in its 78-page opinion to say you have got a city facing liability—— Senator KYL. All right. So you contend that there was Second Circuit precedent. Now, on the en banc review, of course, the ques- tion there is different because you are not bound by any three- judge panel decision in your circuit. So what precedent would have bound—and yet you took the same position in the en banc review. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00427 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 416 For those who are not familiar, a three-judge court decides the case in the first instance. In some situations, if the case is impor- tant enough, the other judges on the circuit—there may be 9 or 10 or 20; I think in the Ninth Circuit there are 28 judges in the cir- cuit. And you can request an en banc review. The entire circuit would sit. And in that case, of course, they are not bound by a three-judge decision because it is the entire circuit sitting of 10 or 12 or 20 judges. So what precedent then would have bound the court in the en banc review? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The panel acted in accordance with its views by setting forth and incorporating the district court’s analysis of the case. Those who disagreed with the opinion made their argu- ments. Those who agreed that en banc certification wasn’t nec- essary voted their way, and the majority of the court decided not to hear the case en banc. I can’t speak for why the others did or did not take the positions they did. Some of them issued opinions. Others joined opinions. Senator KYL. But you felt you were bound by precedent? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That was what we did in terms of the deci- sion, which was to accept the—not accept but incorporate the dis- trict court’s decision analyzing the case and saying we agreed with it. Senator KYL. Understood. But the district court decision is not binding on the circuit court, and the en banc review means that the court should look at it in light of precedents that are stronger than a three-judge decision. So I am still baffled as to what precedent you are speaking of? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Perhaps it is just one bit of background needs to be explained. When a court incorporates, as we did in a per cu- riam, a district court decision below, it does become the court’s precedent. And, in fact, when I—— Senator KYL. The three judges? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes, but when I was on the district court, I issued also a lengthy decision on an issue, a constitutional issue, a direct constitutional issue, that the circuit had not addressed and very few other courts had addressed on the question of whether AEDPA’s statute of limitations on habeas were—— Senator KYL. Okay. Excuse me. I apologize for interrupting, but I have now used half of my time, and you will not acknowledge that even though the Supreme Court said there was no precedent, even though the district court judgment and a three-judge panel judgment cannot be considered precedent binding the en banc panel of the court, you still insist that somehow there was prece- dent there that you were bound by. Judge SOTOMAYOR. As I explained, when the circuit court incor- porated the district court’s opinion, that became the court’s holding. Senator KYL. Of course. Judge SOTOMAYOR. So it did become circuit holding. With respect to—— Senator KYL. By three judges. Judge SOTOMAYOR. With respect—yes. I’m sorry. With respect to the question of precedent, it must be remembered that what the Supreme Court did in Ricci was say: There isn’t much law on how VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00428 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 417 to approach this. Should we adopt a standard different than the circuit did? Because it is a question that we must decide, how to approach this issue to ensure that two provisions of Title VII are consistent with each other. That argument of adopting a different test was not the one that was raised before us, but that was raised clearly before the Su- preme Court. And so that approach is different than saying that the outcome that we came to was not based on our understanding of what it made out a prima facie case. Senator KYL. Well, if it is a matter of first impression, do judges on the Second Circuit typically dispose of important cases of first impression by a summary, one-paragraph order, per curiam opin- ion? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Actually, they did in one case I handled when I was a district court judge. Senator KYL. Would that be typical? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t know how you define ‘‘typical,’’ but if the district court opinion in the judgment of the panel is adequate and fulsome and persuasive, they do. In my Rodriguez v. Artuz case, when I was at district court, on the constitutionality of an act by Congress with respect to the Suspension Clause of the habeas provision, the court did it in less than a paragraph. They just incor- porated my decision as the law of the circuit or the holding of the circuit. Senator KYL. Well, let me quote from Judge Cabranes’ dissent. He said, ‘‘The use of per curiam opinions of this sort, adopting in full the reasoning of a district court without further elaboration, is normally reserved for cases that present straightforward questions that do not require exploration or elaboration by the court of ap- peals. The questions raised in this appeal cannot be classified as such as they are indisputably complex and far from well settled.’’ I guess legal analysts are simply going to have to research and debate the question of whether or not the cases of first impression or complex, important cases are ordinarily dispensed of that way. Let me just say that the implications—the reason I address this is the implications of the decision are far-reaching. I think we would all agree with that. It is an important decision, and it can have far-reaching implications. Let me tell you what three writers, in effect, said about it and get your reaction to it. Here is what the Supreme Court said in Ricci about the decision, about the rule that your court endorsed. It said that the rule that you endorsed—and I am quoting now—‘‘allowing employers to vio- late the disparate treatment prohibition based on a mere good-faith fear of disparate impact liability would encourage race-based action at the slightest hint of disparate impact.’’ This is the Supreme Court. ‘‘Such a rule,’’ it said, ‘‘would amount to a de facto quota system in which a focus on statistics could put undue pressure on employ- ers to make hiring decisions on the basis of race. Even worse, an employer could discard test results or other employment practices with the intent of obtaining the employer’s preferred racial bal- ance.’’ Your colleague on the Second Circuit Judge Cabranes said that under the logic of your decision—and I quote again—‘‘municipal VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00429 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 418 employers could reject the results of an employment examination whenever those results failed to yield a desirable racial outcome’’— in other words, ‘‘failed to satisfy a racial quota.’’ That is why the case is so important. I would imagine you would hope that that result would not pertain. I guess I can just ask you that, that you would not have rendered this decision if you felt that that would be the result. Judge SOTOMAYOR. As I argued—argued. As I stated earlier, the issue for us, no, we weren’t endorsing that result. We were just talking about what the Supreme Court recognized, which was that there was a good-faith basis for the city to act. It set a standard that was new, not argued before us below, and that set forth how to balance those considerations. That is part of what the Court does in the absence of a case previously decided that sets forth the test. And what the Court there said is good faith is not enough. Senator KYL. Understood. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Substantial evidence is what the city has to rely on. Those are different types of questions. Senator KYL. Of course. And the point is you don’t endorse the result that either Judge Cabranes or the Supreme Court predicted would occur had your decision remained in effect. I am sure that you would hope that result would not pertain. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. But I didn’t—that wasn’t the question we were looking at. We were looking at a more narrow question, which was: Could a city in good faith say we’re trying to comply with the law, we don’t know what standard to use, we have good faith for believing that we should not certify? Now the Supreme Court has made clear what standard they should apply. Those are different issues. Senator KYL. Well, I am just quoting from the Supreme Court about the rule that you endorsed in your decision. And, again, it said, the Supreme Court said about your rule that, ‘‘Such a rule would amount to a de facto quota system in which a focus on sta- tistics could put undue pressure on employers to make hiring deci- sions on the basis of race. Even worse, an employer could disregard test results or other employment practices with the intent of ob- taining an employer’s preferred racial balance.’’ I guess we both agree that that is not a good result. Let me ask you about a comment you made about the dissent in the case. A lot of legal commentators have noted that while the basic decision was 5–4, all nine of the Justices disagreed with your panel’s decision to grant summary judgment, that all nine of the judges believed that the court should have been—that the district court should have found the facts in the case that would allow it to apply a test. Your panel had one test. The Supreme Court had a different test. The dissent had yet a different test. But, in any case, whatever the test was, all nine of the Justices believed that the lower court should have heard the facts of the case before sum- mary judgment was granted. I heard you to say that you disagreed with that assessment. Do you agree that the way I stated it is essentially correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It’s difficult because there were a lot of opin- ions in that case, but the engagement among the judges was varied on different levels. And the first engagement that the dissent did VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00430 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 419 with the majority was saying if you are going to apply this new test, this new standard, then you should give the circuit court an opportunity to evaluate the evidence—— Senator KYL. Well, Judge, I have to interrupt you there. The Court didn’t say if you are going to apply a new standard you need to send it back. All nine Justices said that summary judgment was inappropriate, that the case should have been decided on the facts. There were three different tests: the test from your court, the test of the majority of the Supreme Court, and the test of the dissent. Irrespective of what test it was, they said that the case should not have been decided on summary judgment. All nine Justices agreed with that, did they not? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t believe that’s how I read the dissent. It may have to speak for itself, but I—Justice Ginsburg took the position that the Second Circuit’s panel opinion should be affirmed, and she took it by saying that no matter how you looked at this case, it should be affirmed. And so I don’t believe that—that was my conclusion reading the dissent, but obviously it will speak for itself. Senator KYL. Well, it will, and I guess commentators can opine on it. I could read commentary from people like Stuart Taylor, for example, who have an opinion different from yours, but let me ask you one final question in the minute and a half that I have remain- ing. I was struck by your response to a question that Senator Hatch asked you about yet another speech that you gave in which you made a distinction between the justice of a district court and the justice of a circuit court, saying that the district court provides jus- tice for the parties, the circuit court provides justice for society. Now, for a couple of days here, you have testified to us that you believe that not only do district and circuit courts have to follow precedent but that the Supreme Court should follow precedent. So it is striking to me that you would suggest—and this goes back to another comment you made, perhaps flippantly, about courts of ap- peals making law. But it would lead one to believe that you think that the circuit court has some higher calling to create precedent for society. In all of my experience—you have Smith v. Jones in the district court. The court says the way we read the law, Smith wins. It goes to the court of appeals. The court has only one job to decide: Does Smith win or does Jones win? It doesn’t matter what the effect of the case is on society. That is for legislators to decide. You have one job. Who wins, Smith or Jones, based on the law? And you de- cide, yes, the lower court was right; Smith wins. You are applying precedent and you are deciding the case be- tween those parties. You are not creating justice for society except in the most indirect sense that any court that follows precedent and follows the rule of law helps to build on this country’s reliance on the rule of law. Judge SOTOMAYOR. I think we are in full agreement. When prece- dent is set, it is set—it follows the rule of law. And in all of the speeches where I have discussed this issue, I have described the differences between the two courts as one where precedents are set, VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00431 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 420 that the precedents have policy ramifications, but not in the mean- ing that the legislature gives to it. The legislature gives it a meaning in terms of making law. When I am using that term, it is very clear that I am talking about hav- ing a holding, it becomes precedent, and it binds other courts. You are following the rule of law when you are doing that. Senator KYL. Mr. Chairman, I am over the time, but just a final follow-up question, if I could. You yourself noted that you have created precedent as a district court judge. Both district courts and circuit courts created prece- dent simply by deciding a case, but they are both required to follow precedent. Isn’t that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Chairman LEAHY. Only because the Senator went over, I would note the district court in that case did cite the Reeves case, which is a year 2000 Supreme Court case, as precedent, and a binding Second Circuit case, the Hayden case, as precedent. And as the judge has noted, the per curiam decision incorporated the district court decision. Senator Feinstein. Senator FEINSTEIN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have great respect for Senator Kyl. I have worked with him, I guess, for about 12 years now on a subcommittee of this committee. But I think there is a fundamental misreading of the Supreme Court decision if I understand it. It is my understanding that the court was 5–4, is that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It was. Senator FEINSTEIN. And that the four dissenters indicated that they would have reached the same conclusion as the Second Circuit did, is that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That was my understanding. Senator FEINSTEIN. Thank you. Let me clear one thing up. I am not a lawyer and I have had a lot of people ask me, particularly from the west coast who are watching this. What is per curiam? Would you please in common, everyday English explain what through the court means? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It is essentially a unanimous opinion where the court is taking an Act where it is not saying more than either incorporating a decision by the court below, because it is not add- ing anything to it. Senator FEINSTEIN. Right. Judge SOTOMAYOR. In some cases, it is when there is—Judge Cabranes in his dissent pointed out in some cases it is simply used to denote that an issue is so clear and unambiguous that we are just going to—the law. It can be used in a variety of different ways, but it is generally where you are doing something fairly—in a very cursory fashion ei- ther because a District Court judge has done a thorough job—— Senator FEINSTEIN. Which was the case in this case with a very voluminous opinion that I believe was over 50 pages. Is that cor- rect? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I keep saying 78 because that is what I—— Senator FEINSTEIN. Over 50. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00432 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 421 Judge SOTOMAYOR. And as I said, my circuit did that in a case where I addressed as a District Court judge a case of first impres- sion on a direct constitutional issue, the suspension clause. Or it can have—one of the meanings can be that given by Judge Cabranes. Senator FEINSTEIN. Right. Now, my understanding also is that there is precedent in other courts. I am looking at a decision, Oak- ley v. City of Memphis written by the Circuit Court. Essentially what it does is uphold the lower court that did exactly the same thing. Are you familiar with that case? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I am. Senator FEINSTEIN. It is an unpublished opinion, I believe. Is that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Senator FEINSTEIN. And it was a racially mixed group of male and female lieutenants. They took the test, the results came in, the test was canceled and the court upheld the cancellation. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Senator FEINSTEIN. So your case is not starkly out of the main- stream. The reason I say this is going back to my days as mayor, particularly in the 1980’s when there were many courts and many decisions involving both our police and fire departments. It was a very controversial area of the law. But the point I wanted to make is there is precedent and this is certainly one of them. Judge SOTOMAYOR. I would agree that it was precedent. I will not choose to quarrel with the Supreme Court’s description of the situ- ation. Senator FEINSTEIN. Right. I am not asking you to. Now, many have made comments regarding your wise Latina comment. I would just like to take a minute to put your comments in the con- text of the experiences of women. This country is built on very great accomplishments. We forged a new country, we broke away from the British, we wrote docu- ments that have stood the test of time, the Declaration of Inde- pendence, the Constitution, the Bill of Rights. But we also have a history of slavery, of segregated schools, of employment discrimina- tion, of hate crimes and unspoken prejudices that can make it very hard for individuals to be treated fairly or even to believe that they can do well in this society. So I understand empowerment and the role that it plays. Every- thing has been hard fought. We as women did not have the right to vote until 1920 and that was after a tremendous battle waged by a group of very brave women called suffragettes. We graduated law school in 1979. There had never been women on the Supreme Court. Today, women represent 50.7 percent of the population, 48 percent of law school graduates and 30 percent of American lawyers. But there are only 17 women Senators and only one woman currently serving on the Supreme Court and we still make only $.78 on the dollar that a man makes. So we are making progress, but we are not there yet and we should not lose sight of that. My question is, as you have seen this, and you must have seen how widely broadcast this is, that you become an instant role VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00433 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 422 model for women. How do you look at this, your appointment to the court affecting empowerment for women? And I’d be very interested in any comments you might make, and this has nothing to do with the law. Judge SOTOMAYOR. I chose the law because it is more suited to that part of me that has never sought the kind of attention that other public figures get. When I was in law school, some of my friends thought I would go into the political arena not knowing that what I sought was more the life of a judge, the thinking involved in that and the proc- ess of the rule of law. My career as a judge has shown me that regardless of what my desires were, that my life, what I have accomplished, does serve as an inspiration for others. It is a sort of awesome sense of responsi- bility. It is one of the reasons that I do so many activities with peo- ple in the community. Not just Latinas, but all groups because I understand that it is women, it is Latinas, it is immigrants. It is all kinds and all backgrounds. Each one of us faces chal- lenges in their life. Whether you were born rich or poor, of any color or background, life’s challenges place hurdles every day. One of the wonderful parts of the courage of America is that we overcome them. I think that people have taken that sense that on some levels I have done some of that at various stages in my life. So for me, I understand my responsibility. That is why I under- stand and have tried as much as I can to reach out to all different kinds of groups and to make myself available as much as I can. Often I have to say no, otherwise I’d never work. But I meet my responsibilities and work very hard at my job, but I also know I have a responsibility to reach out. Senator FEINSTEIN. Well, for whatever it is worth, I think that you are a walking, talking example of the best part of the United States of America. I just want to say how very proud I am that you are here today and it is my belief that you are going to be a great Supreme Court Justice. I just wanted to say that to you directly and publicly. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Graham. Chairman LEAHY. Senator Graham. Senator GRAHAM. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Something I would like to say to you directly and publicly and with admiration for your life story is that a lot of the wrongs that have been men- tioned, some have been righted, some have yet to come. Judge, I hope you understand the difference between petitioning one’s gov- ernment and having a say in the electoral process and voting for people that, if you do not like, you can get rid of and the difference of society being changed by nine unelected people who have a life- time appointment. Do you understand the difference in how those two systems work? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Absolutely, sir. I understand the Constitu- tion. Senator GRAHAM. The one thing I can tell you—and this will probably be the last time we get to talk in this fashion. I hope to VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00434 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 423 have a chance to get to know you better and we will see what your future holds, but I think it is going to be pretty bright. The bottom line is one of the problems the court has now is that Mr. Ricci has a story to tell, too. There are all kinds of stories to tell in this country and the court has, in the opinion of many of us, gone into the business of societal change, not based on the plain language of the Constitution, but based on motivations that can never be checked at the ballot box. Brown v. Board of Education is instructive in the sense that the court pushed the country to do something politicians were not brave enough to do. Certainly, we are not brave enough in my state. And if I had been elected as a Senator from South Carolina in 1955, the year I was born, I would be amazed if I would have had the courage of a Judge Johnson in the political arena. But the court went through an analysis that separate was not equal. It had a basis in the Constitution, after fact-finding, to reach a reasoned conclusion in the law and the courage to implement that decision, and the society had the wisdom to accept the court’s opinion, even though it was contentious and, literally, people died. We are going to talk about some very difficult societal changes that are percolating in America today, like who should get married and what boundaries there are on the definition of marriage, and who is best able or the most capable of making those fundamental decisions. The full faith and credit clause, in essence, says that when a valid enactment of one state is entered into, the sister states have to accept it. But there is a public policy exception in the full faith and credit clause. Are you aware of that? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I am, applied in different situations. Senator GRAHAM. Some states have different age limits for mar- riage. Some states treat marriage differently than others, and the courts deferred based on public policy. The reason these speeches matter and the reasons elections mat- ter is because people now understand the role of the court in mod- ern society when it comes to social change. That is why we fight so hard to put on the court people who see the world like us. That is true from the left and that is true from the right. Let me give you an example of why that is important. We have talked a lot about the Second Amendment, whether or not it is a fundamental right. We all now agree it is an individual right. Is that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Correct. Senator GRAHAM. Well, that is groundbreaking precedent in the sense that just until a few months ago or last year, I guess, that was not the case. But it is today. It is the law of the land, by the Supreme Court, the Second Amendment is an individual right, and you acknowledge that. That is correct? The Heller case. Judge SOTOMAYOR. That was the decision and it is what the court has held, and so it is unquestionably an individual right. Senator GRAHAM. But here is the next step for the court. You will have to, if you get on the court, with your fellow justices, sit down and discuss whether or not it is a fundamental right to the point that it is incorporated through the due process clause of the 14th Amendment and applied to every state. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00435 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 424 Is it not fair to say, Judge, that when you do that, not only will you listen to your colleagues, you will read whatever case law is available, you are going to come down based on what you think America is all about? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No, sir. Senator GRAHAM. So what binds you when it comes to a funda- mental right? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The rule of law. Senator GRAHAM. Is not the rule of law, when it comes to what you consider to be a fundamental right, your opinion as to what is fundamental among all of us? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No. In fact, the question that you raise, is it fundamental in the sense of the law. Senator GRAHAM. Right. Judge SOTOMAYOR. That is a legal term. It’s very different and it is important to remember that the Supreme Court’s precedent on the Second Amendment predated its more closely developed—— Senator GRAHAM. I hate to interrupt, but is there sort of a legal cookbook that you can go to and say this is a fundamental right, A, and B is not? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, there’s not a cookbook, but there’s precedent that was established after the older precedent that has talked and described that doctrine of incorporation. That’s a set of precedents that—— Senator GRAHAM. Are you talking about the 1890 case? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Well, no. The 1890 case was the Su- preme Court’s holding on this issue. But since that time, there has been a number of number of decisions discussing the incorporation doctrine, applying it to different provisions of the Constitution. Senator GRAHAM. Is there any personal judgment to be relied upon by a Supreme Court justice in deciding whether or not the Second Amendment is a fundamental right? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, you hire judges for their judgment, not their personal views or what their sense of what the outcome should be. You hire your point judges for the purpose of under- standing whether they respect law, whether they respect precedent and apply it in a—— Senator GRAHAM. I do not doubt that you respect the law, but you are going to be asked, along with eight other colleagues, if you get on the court, to render a decision as to whether or not the Sec- ond Amendment is a fundamental right shared by the American people. There is no subjective judgment there? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The issue will be controlled by the court’s analysis of that question in the case, fundamental as defined by in- corporation, in—likely will be looked at by the court in a case that challenges a state regulation. At that point, I would presume that the court will look at its older precedent in the way it did in Heller, consider whether it con- trols the issue or not. It will decide, even if it controls it, whether it should be revisited under the doctrine of stare decisis. It could decide it doesn’t control and that would be its decision. It could decide it does control, but it should revisit it. In revisiting it, it will look at a variety of different factors, among them, have VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00436 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 425 there been changes in related areas of law that would counsel ques- tioning this. As I’ve indicated, there was a lot of law after the older cases on incorporation. I suspect, but I don’t know, because I can’t prejudge the issue, that the court will consider that with all of the other ar- guments that the parties will make. Senator GRAHAM. Well, maybe I have got it wrong then. Maybe I am off base here. Maybe you have got the seven the circuit talk- ing about the Heller case did not decide the issue of whether it should be incorporated to the states, because it has only dealt with the District of Columbia. You have got the ninth circuit—and I never thought I would live to hear myself say this—look at the ninth circuit. They have a pret- ty good rationale as to why the Second Amendment should be con- sidered a fundamental right and they talked about the long- standing relationship of the English man, and they should have put woman, at least in South Carolina that would have applied, to gun ownership. They talked about it was this right to bear arms that led to our independence. It was this right to bear arms that put down a rebel- lion in this country. And they talked about who we are as a people and our history as a people. And, Judge, that is why the Supreme Court matters. I do believe, at the end of the day, you are not going to find a law book that tells you whether or not a fundamental right exists vis-a-vis the Second Amendment, that you are going to have to rely upon your view of America, who we are, how far we have come and where we are going to go, and our relationship to gun ownership. That is why these choices are so important. And here is what I will say about you and you may not agree with that, but I believe that is what you are going to do and I be- lieve that is what every other justice is going to do. And here is what I will say about you. I do not know how you are going to come out on that case, because I think, fundamentally, Judge, you are able, after all these years of being a judge, to em- brace a right that you may not want for yourself, to allow others to do things that are not comfortable to you, but for the group, they are necessary. That is my hope for you. That is what makes you, to me, more acceptable as a judge and not an activist, because an activist would be a judge who would be chomping at the bit to use this wonderful opportunity to change America through the Supreme Court by tak- ing their view of life and imposing it on the rest of us. I think and believe, based on what I know about you so far, that you are broad-minded enough to understand that America is bigger than the Bronx, is bigger than South Carolina. Now, during your time as an advocate, do you understand iden- tity politics? What is identity politics? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Politics based simply on a person’s character- istics, generally referred to either race or ethnicity or gender, reli- gion. It is politics based on—— Senator GRAHAM. Do you embrace identity politics personally? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Personally, I don’t, as a judge, in any way embrace it with respect to judging. As a person, I do believe that VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00437 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 426 certain groups have and should express their views on whatever so- cial issues may be out there. But as I understand the word ‘‘identity politics,’’ it’s usually deni- grated because it suggests that individuals are not considering what’s best for America, and that I don’t believe in. I think that whatever a group advocates, obviously, it advocates on behalf of its interests and what the group thinks it needs, but I would never endorse a group advocating something that was con- trary to some basic constitutional right as it was known at the time, although people advocate changes in the law all the time. Senator GRAHAM. Do you believe that your speeches, properly read, embrace identity politics? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I think my speeches embrace the concept that I just described, which is, groups, you have interests that you should seek to promote; what you’re doing is important in helping the community develop; participate, participate in the process of your community; participate in the process of helping to change the conditions you live in. I don’t describe it as identity politics, because it’s not that I’m advocating that groups do something illegal. Senator GRAHAM. Well, Judge, to be honest with you, your record as a judge has not been radical, by any means. It is, to me, left of center. But your speeches are disturbing, particularly to conserv- atives, quite frankly, because they do not talk about get involved, go to the ballot box, make sure you understand that American can be whatever you would like it to be, there is a place for all of us. Those speeches, to me, suggested gender and racial affiliations in a way that a lot of us wonder will you take that line of thinking to the Supreme Court in these cases of first precedent. You have been very reassuring here today and throughout this hearing that you are going to try to understand the difference be- tween judging and whatever political feelings you have about groups or gender. Now, when you were a lawyer, what was the mission statement of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund? Judge SOTOMAYOR. To promote the civil rights and equal oppor- tunity of Hispanics in the United States. Senator GRAHAM. During your time on the board, and you had about every job a board member could have, is it a fair statement to say that all of the cases embraced by this group on abortion ad- vocated the woman’s right to choose and argued against restric- tions by state and Federal Government on abortion rights? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I can’t answer that question, because I didn’t review the briefs. I did know that the fund had a health care—— Senator GRAHAM. Judge? Judge SOTOMAYOR [continuing]. Docket that included challenges to certain limitations on a woman’s right to terminate her preg- nancy under certain circumstances. Senator GRAHAM. Judge, I may be wrong, but every case I have seen by the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund advocated against re- strictions on abortion, advocated Federal taxpayer funding of abor- tion for low income women. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00438 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 427 Across the board, when it came to the death penalty, it advocates against the death penalty. When it came to employment law, it ad- vocates against testing and for quotas. That is just the record of this organization. The point I am trying to make is that whether or not you advocate those positions and how you will judge can be two different things. I have not seen, in your judging, this advocate that I saw or this board member. But when it came to the death penalty, you filed a memorandum with the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund in 1981, and I would like to submit this to the record, where you signed this memo- randum and you basically said that the death penalty should not be allowed in America because it created a racial bias and it was undue burden on the perpetrator and their family. What led you to that conclusion in 1981? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The question in 1991—— Senator GRAHAM. 1981. Judge SOTOMAYOR. 1981, I misspoke about the year, was an ad- vocacy by the fund, taking a position on whether legislation by the State of New York outlawing or permitting the death penalty should be adopted by the State. I thank you for recognizing that my decisions have not shown me to be an advocate on behalf of any group. That is a different, dra- matically different question than whether I follow the law. And in the one case I had as a district court judge, I followed the law com- pletely. Senator GRAHAM. The only reason I mention this is when Alito and Roberts were before this panel, they were asked about memos they wrote in the Reagan administration, clients they represented, a lot to try to suggest that if you wrote a memo about this area of the law to your boss, Ronald Reagan, you must not be fit to judge. Well, they were able to explain the difference between being a lawyer in the Reagan administration and being a judge and, to the credit of many of my Democratic colleagues, they understood that. I am just trying to make the point that when you are an advo- cate, when you were on this board, the board took positions that I think are left of center and you have every right to do it. Have you ever known a low income Latina woman who was de- voutly pro life? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Senator GRAHAM. Have you ever known a low income Latino family who supported the death penalty? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Senator GRAHAM. So the point is there are many points of view within groups based on income. You have, I think, consistently, as an advocate, took a point of view that was left of center. You have, as a judge, been generally in the mainstream. The Ricci case, you missed one of the biggest issues in the coun- try or you took a pass. I do not know what it is. But I am going to say this, that as Senator Feinstein said, you have come a long way. You have worked very hard. You have earned the respect of Ken Starr, and I would like to put his statement in the record, and you have said some things that just bugged the hell out of me. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00439 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 428 The last question on the wise Latina woman comment. To those who may be bothered by that, what do you say? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I regret that I have offended some people. I believe that my life demonstrates that that was not my intent to leave the impression that some have taken from my words. Senator GRAHAM. You know what, Judge? I agree with you. Good luck. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Durbin has actually re- sponded to my so far vain request that Senators may want to pass on the basis that all questions may have been asked, not everybody has asked them. But Senator Klobuchar, yesterday, had some very serious and succinct areas that she was asking. I know time ran out and I would like to yield to Senator Klobuchar, because she may want to follow on those. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank you again, Judge. I think they have turned the air condi- tioning on, so this is good. I just have two quick follow-ups fol- lowing Senator Graham’s question. The first is that the only death penalty case that I know of— there may be another one that you ruled on—the Heatley case, you, in fact, sustained the death penalty in that case. Is that correct? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I sustained—well, I rejected the challenges of the defendant that the application of the death penalty to him was based on race, yes. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Okay. Thank you. And then, just the second one, Senator Graham mentioned the issues of Justice Roberts and the difference between an advocate and a judge. And I just came across the quote that Justice Roberts gave about his work during the Reagan administration, and he said, ‘‘I can give the commit- ment that I appreciate that my role as a judge is different than my role as a staff lawyer for an administration. As a judge, I have no agenda. I have a guide in the Constitution and the laws and the precedents of the Court, and those are what I would apply with an open mind after fully and fairly considering the arguments and as- sessing the considered views of my colleagues on the bench.’’ Would you agree with that statement? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Wholeheartedly. Senator KLOBUCHAR. All right. Thank you. There were some letters that have not yet been put on the record, and they are quite a collection of letters. I considered read- ing them all on the record but thought better of that. So I thought I would ask the Chair if I could put these letters on the record, and these are letters of support for you from, first of all, the National Fraternal Order of Police in support of your nomination, the Police Executive Research Forum, the National Association of Black Law Enforcement Executives, the National Latino Peace Officers Asso- ciation, the New York State Law Enforcement Council, the Na- tional District Attorneys Association, the Association of Prosecuting Attorneys, the National Association of Police Organizations, the National Sheriffs Association, the Major City Chiefs Association, the Detectives Endowment Association, and then also a letter from 40 of your past colleagues in the Manhattan D.A.’s Office, former VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00440 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 429 district attorney colleagues. And all of these groups have given you their support. [The letters appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. And I did want to note just two very brief portions from the letter. The one from the Police Executive Re- search Forum reads, ‘‘Sonia Sotomayor went out of her way to stand shoulder to shoulder with those of us in public safety at a time when New York City needed strong, tough, and fair prosecu- tors.’’ And then also, the letter from your colleagues I found very en- lightening. It was much more personal. It said that, ‘‘She began as a rookie in 1979, working long hours, prosecuting an enormous caseload of misdemeanors before judges managing overwhelming dockets. Sonia so distinguished herself in this challenging assign- ment that she was among the very first in her starting class to be selected to handle felonies. She prosecuted a wide variety of felony cases, including serving as co-counsel at a notorious murder trial. She developed a specialty in the investigation and prosecution of child pornography cases. Throughout all of this, she impressed us as one who was singularly determined in fighting crime and vio- lence, for Sonia’s service as a prosecutor was a way to bring order to the streets of a city she dearly loves. We are proud to have served with Sonia Sotomayor. She solemnly adheres to the rule of law and believes that it should be applied equally and fairly to all Americans.’’ ‘‘As a group,’’ your former colleagues say, ‘‘we have different worldviews and political affiliations, but our support for Sonia is entirely nonpartisan. And the fact that so many of us have re- mained friends with Sonia over three decades speaks well, we think, of her warmth and collegiality.’’ A pretty nice letter. In reading these letters from these law enforcement groups, there was just one follow-up case that you had that I wanted to allow you to enlighten the country about, and this is one that former New York Police Detective Chris Montanino spoke about re- cently in an article, and he spoke about a case you worked on as district attorney. He talked about—it was a child pornography case—how he had gone to various prosecutors to try to get them interested in the case, and he could not get them interested. And I have some guesses. Some of these cases, as you know, can be very involved with a lot of evidence and sometimes computer forensics and things like that. But he was not able to interest them in taking on the case. But you were the one that was willing to take on the case, and it led to the prosecution of two perpetrators. Could you talk a little bit about that case, why you think others didn’t and why you decided to take on the case? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, I can’t speak to why others decided to pass on the case. I can talk to you about my views at the time. The New York Court of Appeals had invalidated the New York statute on child pornography on the ground of a constitutional vio- lation, Federal constitutional violation, that the statute did not comport with the Federal Constitution. The Supreme Court took that case directly from the court of ap- peals, as is its right to review all issues of Federal constitutional VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00441 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 430 law, and reversed the New York Court of Appeals and reinstated the statute. My sense is because there were still so many open questions about both the legality of the statute and the question of the dif- ficulty in proving the particular crime at issue that involved two men who worked in a change of—chain of adult bookstores in the then-Times Square area. Times Square has changed dramatically since that time. It was mostly circumstantial. We had some tapes, but their knowledge of what those tapes contained, their intent to sell and distribute child pornography involving children below a certain age—it was a difficult, difficult legal and factual case. But it was clear that it was a serious case. We’re talking about the distribu- tion of films that show children who were anywhere from 8 years old to 12 years old being explicitly sexually abused. And it seemed to me that, regardless of the outcome of the case, whether I secured the convictions or not, whether it was held up on appeal or not, that the issues it raised had to be presented in court because of the importance of the crime. And so I brought the prosecution. I had a co-counsel in that case who was second-seating me in that case, meaning she was assisting me. And the case took a while at trial because, as I said, it was circumstantial. The jury returned a verdict against both defendants. They were sentenced quite severely, and the cases held up on appeal. It was an enormously complicated case. I assisted in the appeal because it was so complicated that one of the heads of the Appeals Division of the New York County District Attorney’s Office had to become involved in it. But the convictions were sustained. And so the effort resulted in a conviction of two men who were distributing films that had the vilest of sexual acts portrayed against children. Senator KLOBUCHAR. And one last case I wanted to ask you about, which the Chairman had briefly mentioned in his opening, and it was a troubling case because it involved an elected official. It was U.S. v. Giordano, and this case—it happened when you were a judge, and it involved very troubling facts with the mayor of Wa- terbury, Connecticut, in a variety of crimes stemming from his re- peated sexual abuse of a minor daughter and a niece of a pros- titute. And you wrote for the majority in that case. There was actu- ally a dissent from one of your fellow judges on the Second Circuit, and you held in part that the mayor could, in fact, be charged with the crime of violating the young girl’s civil rights under color of State law. And I think—and I do not want to put words in your mouth, but the reason you were able to use that theory is that you noted how frequently the mayor reiterated to his young victims that they would be trouble with law enforcement if they didn’t sub- mit to what he wanted them to do. Could you talk about how that case fits into your overall ap- proach to judging? Judge SOTOMAYOR. As I have indicated, the role of a judge is to look at Congress’ words in a statute and discern its intent. And in cases that present new facts, you must take existing precedents and apply the teachings of those precedents to those new facts. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00442 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 431 In the Giordano case, there had not been another situation quite like this one. This was a mayor who, working through a woman, secured sexual acts by very young girls that were taking place in his office. And through the woman he was working with and also through his own exhortations, ‘‘Don’t tell anybody, you’ll get into trouble,’’ and the woman’s exhortations to the child, the person he was conspiring with, that they would get in trouble with the police because the police wouldn’t believe them, they would believe him because he was a mayor, the question for the court became: Is that acting under color of State law? Is he using his office to promote this illegal activity against these young girls? The majority, viewing these facts, said yes, that’s the principles we discern from precedent about what the use of State law means—of acting under State law means. The dissent disagreed and it disagreed using its own rationale about why the law should not be read that way. But these are cases that rely upon an understanding both of what the words say and how precedent has interpreted them, and that’s what the ma- jority of the panel did in that case. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, and I think it has been enlightening for people to hear about some of your views on these criminal cases. And I would just like to ask one last question, and it is the exact question that my friend and colleague Senator Graham asked Chief Justice Roberts at his confirmation hearing. And he said, ‘‘What would you like history to say about you when all is said and done? ’’ Judge SOTOMAYOR. I can’t live my life to write history’s story. That will be the job of historians long after I’m gone. Some of them start now, but long after I’m gone. In the end, I hope it will say I’m a fair judge, that I was a caring person, and that I lived my life serving my country. Senator KLOBUCHAR. I think you can’t say much more than that. Thank you very much, Judge. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Judge. I appreciate that. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar. Senator Cornyn, who, as I mentioned yesterday, is a former Su- preme Court Justice of Texas as well as former Attorney General, valued member of this Committee, Senator Cornyn. Senator CORNYN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Good morning, Senator. Senator CORNYN. Judge, when we met the first time, as I believe I recounted earlier, I made a pledge to you that I would do my best to make sure that you were treated respectfully and this would be a fair process. I just want to ask you up front, do you feel like you have been given a chance to explain your record and your judicial philosophy to the American people? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I have, sir, and every Senator on both sides of the aisle that have made that promise to me have kept it fully. Senator CORNYN. And Judge, you know the test is not whether Judge Sonia Sotomayor is intelligent. You are. The test is not whether we like you. I think speaking personally, I think we all do. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00443 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 432 The test is not even whether we admire you or respect you, al- though we do admire you and respect what you have accomplished. The test is really what kind of Justice will you be if confirmed to the Supreme Court of the United States? Will you be one that adheres to a written Constitution and written laws and respect the right of the people to make their laws to their elected representa- tives, or will you pursue some other agenda? Personal, political, ideological, that is something other than enforcing the law? I think that is really the question. Of course the purpose of these hearings as you have gone through these tedious rounds of questioning is to allow us to clear up any confusion about your record and about your judicial philos- ophy. Yet so far I find there is still some confusion. For example, in 1996, you said the idea of a stable ‘Law’ was a public myth. This week you said that fidelity to the law is your only concern. In 1996, you argued that indefiniteness in the law was a good thing because it allowed judges to change the law. Today you characterize that argument as being only that ambiguity can exist and that it is Congress’ job to change the law. In 2001, you said that innate physiological differences of judges would or could impact their decisions. Yesterday you characterized that argument as being only that innate physiological differences of litigants to change decisions. In 2001, you disagreed explicitly with Justice O’Connor’s view of whether a wise man and a wise woman would reach the same deci- sion. Yet during these hearings you characterize your argument as being that you agreed with her. A few weeks ago in your speech on foreign law to the American Civil Liberties Union, you rejected the approach of Justices Alito and Thomas with regard to foreign law, and yet it seems to me that during these hearings you have agreed with them. So Judge, what should I tell my constituents who are watching these hearings and saying to themselves, in Berkeley and in other places around the country she says one thing, but at these hearings you are saying something which sounds contradictory if not diamet- rically opposed to some of the things you have said in speeches around the country? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I would tell them to look at my decisions for 17 years and note that in every one of them, I have done what I say that I so firmly believe in. I prove my fidelity to the law, the fact that I do not permit personal views, sympathies or prejudices to influence the outcome of cases, rejecting the challenges of nu- merous plaintiffs with undisputably sympathetic claims, but ruling the way I have on the basis of law, rejecting those claims. I would ask them to look at the speeches completely, to read what their context was and to understand the background of those issues that are being discussed. I didn’t disagree with what I understood was the basic premise that Justice O’Connor was making, which was that being a man or a woman doesn’t affect the capacity of someone to judge fairly or wisely. What I disagreed was with the literal meaning of her words because neither of us meant the literal meaning of our words. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00444 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 433 My use of her words was pretty bad in terms of leaving a bad impression, but both of us were talking about the value of experi- ence and the fact that it gives you equal capacity. In the end, I would tell your constituents, Senators, look at my record and understand that my record talks about who I am as a person, what I believe in, and my judgment and my opinion, that following the rule of law is the foundation of our system of justice. Senator CORNYN. Thank you for your answer. Judge, I actually agree that your judicial record strikes me as pretty much in the main stream of judicial decision making by District Court judges and by Court of Appeals judges on the Federal bench. While I think what is creating this cognitive dissonance for many of us and for many of my constituents who I have been hearing from is that you appear to be a different person almost in your speeches and in some of the comments that you made. So I guess part of what we need to do is to try to reconcile those, as I said earlier. I want to pivot to a slightly different subject and go back to your statement that the courts should not make law. You have also said that the Supreme Court decisions that a lot of us believe made law actually were an interpretation of the law. So I would like for you to clarify that. If the Supreme Court in the next few years holds that there is a constitutional right to same sex marriage, would that be making the law? Or would that interpreting the law? I’m not asking you to prejudge that case or the merits of the ar- guments, but just to characterize whether that would be inter- preting the law or whether that would be making the law. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, that question is so embedded with its answer, isn’t it? Meaning if the court rules one way and I say that is making law, then it forecasts that I have a particular view of whatever arguments may be made on this issue suggesting that it is interpreting the Constitution. I understand the seriousness of this question. I understand the seriousness of same sex marriage. But I also know as I think all America knows, that this issue is being hotly debated on every level of our three branches of government. It is being debated in Congress and Congress has passed an Act relating to same sex marriage. It is being debated on various courts on the state level, certain higher courts have made rulings. This is the type of situation where even the characterizing of whatever the court may do as one way or another suggests that I have both prejudged an issue and that I come to that issue with my own personal views suggesting an outcome. Neither is true. I would look at that issue in the context of a case that came before me with a completely open mind. Senator CORNYN. Forget the same sex marriage hypothetical. Is there a difference in your mind between making the law and inter- preting the law? Or is that a distinction without a difference? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Oh, no. It is a very important distinction. The laws are written by Congress. It makes factual findings, it deter- mines in its judgment what the fit is between the law it is passing and the remedy that it is giving as a right. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00445 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 434 The courts when they are interpreting always has to start with what does the Constitution say? What is the words of the Constitu- tion? How has precedent interpreted those? What are the principles that it has discussed govern a particular situation? Senator CORNYN. How do you reconcile that answer with your statement that Courts of Appeals make policy? Judge SOTOMAYOR. In both cases in which I have used that word in two different speeches, one was a speech, one was a remark to students. This is almost like the discussion about fundamental, what does it mean to a non- lawyer and fundamental what it means in the context of Supreme Court legal theory. Senator CORNYN. Are you saying it is only a discussion that law- yers could love? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Not love, but in the context in both contexts. It is very, very clear that I am talking about completely the dif- ference between the two judgings and that Circuit Courts when they issue a holding, it becomes precedent on all similar cases. In both comments, that statement was made absolutely expressly that that was the context of the policy I was talking about which is the ramifications of a precedent on all similar cases. When Congress talks about policy, it is talking about something totally different. It is talking about making law, what are the choices that I am going to make in making the law. Those are two different things. I was not talking about courts making law. In fact, in the Duke speech, I used making policy in terms of its ramifications on exist- ing cases. I never said in either speech we make law in the sense that Congress would. Senator CORNYN. Let me turn to another topic. In 1996 after you had been on the Federal bench for 4 years, you wrote a law review article in the Suffolk University Law Review that pertains to cam- paign financing. You said, ‘Our system of election financing permits extensive pri- vate, including corporate financing of candidate’s campaigns, rais- ing again and again the question of what the difference is between contributions and bribes and how legislators or other officials can operate objectively on behalf of the electorate.’ You said, ‘Can elected officials say with credibility that they are carrying out the mandate of a democratic society representing only the general public good when private money plays such a large role in their campaigns’ ? Judge Sotomayor, what is the difference in your mind between a political contribution and a bribe? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The context of that statement was a question about what was perking through the legal system at the time it has been, as you know, before the Supreme Court since Buckley v. Valeo. Senator CORNYN. I agree, Your Honor. But my question is what in your mind is the difference between a political contribution and a bribe? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The question is a contributor seeking to influ- ence or to buy someone’s vote, and there are situations in which elected officials have been convicted of taking a bribe because they VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00446 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 435 have agreed in exchange for a sum of money to vote on a particular legislation in a particular way. That violates the Federal law. The question that was discussed there was a much broader question as to where do you draw that line as a society? What choices do you think about in terms of what Congress will do, what politicians will do. I have often spoken about the difference between what the law permits and what individuals should use to guide their conduct. The fact that the law says that you can do this doesn’t always mean that you as a person should choose to do this. In fact, we op- erate within the law, we should not be a law breaker, but you should act in situations according to that sense of what is right or wrong. We have the recent case that the Supreme Court considered of the judge who was given an extraordinary amount of money by a campaign contributor dwarfing everything else in his campaign in terms of contributions, funding a very expensive campaign. Senator CORNYN. In fact, that was not a direct contribution to the judge, was it? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, it was not a direct contribution, but it was a question there where the Supreme Court said the appear- ance of impropriety in this case would have counseled the judge the get off. Senator CORNYN. Let us get back to my question, if I can. Let me ask you this. Last year, President Obama set a record in fund raising from pri- vate sources, raising an unprecedented amount of campaign con- tributions. Do you think, given your law review article, that Presi- dent Obama can say with credibility that he is carrying out the mandate of a democratic society? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That was not what I was talking about in that speech. Senator CORNYN. Well, he was not elected in 1996. But what I am getting at is whether you are basically painting with such a broad brush when it comes to people’s rights under the First Amendment to participate in the political process, either to volun- teer their time, make in kind contributions, make financial con- tributions. Do you consider that a form of bribery or in any way improper? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No, sir. No, sir. Senator CORNYN. Okay. Thank you for your answer. In the short time we have remaining, let me return to the New Haven fire- fighter case briefly. As you know, two witnesses I believe will testify after you are through, and I am sure you will welcome being finished with this period of questioning. A lot of attention has been given to the lead plaintiff, Frank Ricci, who is dyslexic, and the hardship he has en- dured in order to prepare for this competitive examination only to see the competitive examination results thrown out. But I was struck on July 3rd in the New York Times when they featured another firefighter who will testify here today, and that was Benjamin Vargas. Benjamin Vargas is the son of Puerto Rican parents, as you prob- ably know, and he found himself in the odd position to say the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00447 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 436 least of being discriminated against based on his race, based on the decision by the Circuit Court panel that you sat on. At the closing of the article, Lieutenant Vargas—who hopes to be Captain Vargas as a result of the Supreme Court decision because he scored sixth on the competitive examination—at the very last paragraph in this article it says, ‘‘Gesturing toward his three sons, Lieutenant Vargas explained why he had no regrets. He said, ‘I want to give them a fair shake. To get a job on the merits, not be- cause they are Hispanic or to fill a quota.’ He said, ‘What a lousy way to live.’ ’’ That is his testimony. So I want to ask you in conclusion, do you agree with Chief Jus- tice John Roberts when he says the best way to stop discriminating based on race is to stop discriminating based on race? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The best way to live in our society is to follow the command of the Constitution, provide equal opportunity for all. I follow what the Constitution says, that is how the law should be structured and how it should be applied to whatever individual cir- cumstances come before the court. Senator CORNYN. With respect, Judge, my question was do you agree with Chief Justice John Roberts’ statement, or do you dis- agree? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The question of agreeing or disagreeing sug- gests an opinion on what the ruling was in the case that he used it in. I accept the court’s ruling in that case. That was a very re- cent case. There is no quarrel that I have, no disagreement. I do not accept that in that situation that statement the court found applied. I just said the issue is a constitutional one, equal opportunity for all under the law. Senator CORNYN. I understand that you might not want to com- ment on what Chief Justice John Roberts wrote in an opinion even though I don’t think he was speaking of a specific case but rather an approach to the law which would treat us all as individuals with equal dignity and equal rights. But let me ask you whether you agree with Martin Luther King when he said he dreamed of a day when his children would be judged not by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. Do you agree with that? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I think every American agrees with that. Senator CORNYN. Amen. Mr. Chairman? Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator Cornyn. Just so we will know for the schedule, we are going to go to Senator Specter, who is a long-time member of this committee and one of the most senior members here. Once Senator Specter’s questions are finished, we will take a very short break. Does that work for you, Judge? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It most certainly does. Chairman LEAHY. Okay. So Senator Specter is recognized for up to 20 minutes. Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Sotomayor, you have been characterized as running a hot courtroom, asking tough questions. We see popping out of the Supreme Court opinions from time to time, statements about pretty tough ideological battles in their conference room. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00448 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 437 Justice Scalia was quoted as saying, ‘‘The court must be living in another world. Day-by-day, case-by-case, it is busy designing a Constitution for a country I do not recognize.’’ Referring to a woman’s right to choose, in Roe v. Wade, he said this, ‘‘Justice O’Connor’s assertion that a fundamental rule of judi- cial restraint requires us to avoid reconsidering Roe cannot be taken seriously.’’ Do you think it possible that, if confirmed, you will be a litigator in that conference room, take on the ideological battles which pop out from time to time, from what we read in their opinions? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t judge on the basis of ideology. I judge on the basis of the law and my reasoning. That’s how I have com- ported myself in the circuit court. When my colleagues and I, in many cases, have initially come to disagreeing positions, we’ve dis- cussed them and either persuaded each other, changed each other’s minds, and worked from the starting point of arguing, discussing, exchanging perspectives on what the law commands. Senator SPECTER. Well, perhaps you will be tempted to be a tough litigator in the court. Time will tell, if you are confirmed, if you have some of those provocative statements. Let me move on to a case which you have decided. You have been reluctant to make comments about what other people have said, but I want to ask you about your view as to what you have said. In the case of Entergy v. Riverkeeper, which involved the question which is very important to matters now being considered by Con- gress on climate control and global warming, you ruled in the sec- ond circuit that the best technology should be employed, not the cost-benefit. The Supreme Court reversed 5–4, saying it was cost- benefit. Could we expect you to stand by your interpretation of the Clean Water Act when, if confirmed, you get to the Supreme Court and can make that kind of a judgment because you are not bound by precedent? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, I am bound by precedent to the extent that all precedence is entitled to the respect it—to respect under the doctrine of stare decisis. And to the extent that the Supreme Court has addressed this issue of cost-benefit and its permissibility under the Clean Water Act, that’s the holding I would apply to any new case that came and the framework—it establishes the frame- work I would employ to new cases. Senator SPECTER. Let me return to a subject I raised yesterday, but from a different perspective, and that is the issue of the Su- preme Court taking on more cases. In 1886, there were 451 cases decided by the Supreme Court; 1985, 161 signed opinions; and, in 2007, only 67 signed opinions. The court has not undertaken cases involving circuit splits. In the letter I wrote to you, which will be made a part of the record, listing a great many circuit splits and the problems that that brings when one circuit decides one way and another circuit another and the other circuits are undecided, and the Supreme Court declines to take cases. Do you agree with what Justice Scalia said dissenting in Sorich, where the court refused to take a key circuit split; that when the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00449 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 438 court decides not to, ‘‘It seems to me quite irresponsible to let the current chaos prevail with other courts not knowing what to do? ’’ Stated differently, do you think the Supreme Court has time to and should take up more circuit splits? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It does appear that the Supreme Court’s docket has lessened over time, its decisions that it’s addressing. Be- cause of that, it certainly does appear that it has the capacity to accept more cases. And the issue of circuit splits is one of the factors that the court’s own local rules set out as a consideration for justices to think about in the cert process. So in answer to your question, the direct answer is, yes, it does appear that it has the capacity. Senator SPECTER. The current rule in the Supreme Court is that petitions for certiorari are applied and there is a so-called cert pool where seven of the nine justices, excluding only Justice Stevens and Justice Alito, do not participate in the cert pool. So that the people applying for a cert don’t have the independent judgments. When Chief Justice Roberts, before he became Chief Justice, he said the cert pool’s powers are a little disquieting. Would you join the cert pool or would you maintain an inde- pendent status, as Justice Stevens and Justice Alito do, in having their own clerks and their own individual review as to whether a cert ought to be granted? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I would probably do what Justice Alito did, although I haven’t decided, if I’m given the honor of becoming a member of the Supreme Court, I haven’t decided anything. I’m not even sure where I would live in New York if this were to happen— in Washington. But putting that aside, Senator, my approach would probably be similar to Justice Alito, which is experience the process, take, for a period of time, consider its costs and benefits, and then whether to try the alternative or not and figure out what I think works best in terms of the functioning of my chambers and the court. I can’t give a definitive answer, because I generally try to keep an open mind until I experience something and can then speak from knowledge about whether to change it or not. Senator SPECTER. Judge Sotomayor, you have had some experi- ence on the pilot program conducted by Federal Judicial Con- ference. These were the conclusions reached by the pilot program. They said, ‘‘Attitudes of judges toward electronic media coverage of civil proceedings are initially neutral and became more favorable after experience under the pilot program.’’ ‘‘Judges and attorneys who had experience with electronic media coverage under the program generally reported observing a small or no effects of the camera presence on participants in the pro- ceedings, courtroom decorum, or the administration of justice.’’ Would you agree with that, based on your own personal experi- ence having television in your courtroom? Judge SOTOMAYOR. My experience was limited. So I can’t speak to the more broad conclusion of that report. I can say that, as we discussed when I met with you, Senator, mine was positive. In the two cases—I believe I only had two cases where the media asked to record a proceeding. I may not remember others, but I do VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00450 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 439 remember two. And on the circuit court, we do provide tapes upon request and some media has asked to record our oral arguments. But my experience has generally been positive and I would cer- tainly be able to recount that. Senator SPECTER. C–SPAN has conducted a survey which shows that 61 percent of the American people would like to see the Su- preme Court televised. In the survey, it disclosed how little the American public knows about the Supreme Court. Mr. Chairman, I would ask consent this be included in the record. Chairman LEAHY. Without objection, it will be included in the record. [The information appear as a submission for the record.] Senator SPECTER. The interest that has been generated by this confirmation proceeding, encouraged by the television, shows the enormous interest that people have in what the court does. There has been a fair amount of coverage by the justices on tele- vision. As I cited yesterday, many have appeared on television. Jus- tice Kennedy says he believes that television is inevitable. Everybody has said who has testified that there is a grave con- cern about the collegiality and people do not want to make a judg- ment before talking to their colleagues, and the sense has been de- rived that if anybody really has a strong objection—and Justice Souter has expressed that view, as noted on his widespread com- ment that if TV cameras were to come to the court, they would have to come in over his dead body; and, if confirmed, Justice Souter’s body won’t be there at all. Would you tell your colleagues the favorable experience that you have had with television in your courtroom and perhaps take a role in encouraging your colleagues to follow that experience for the Su- preme Court? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I would certainly relay my experiences. To the extent some of them may not know about the pilot study in many courts, I would share that with them, although I suspect they do know, and will participate in discussions with them on this issue. Those things I would do, Senator. Senator SPECTER. Some of my colleagues have questioned wheth- er, as you stated, your panel in the Maloney case was really bound by Supreme Court precedent. The seventh circuit reached the same decision your panel did and in that opinion, written by a highly re- spected Republican judge, Frank Easterbrook, the seventh circuit pointed out that Heller specifically declined to reconsider older Su- preme Court cases which have held that the Second Amendment applies only to the Federal Government. Judge Easterbrook wrote, ‘‘That does not license the inferior courts to go their own ways; it just notes that [the older precedent] is open to reexamination by the Justices themselves when the time comes.’’ That was your court’s conclusion, also, wasn’t it? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It was and I understand, having reviewed Justice Easterbrook’s opinion, that he agreed with the reasoning of Maloney on that point. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00451 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 440 Senator SPECTER. I want to return to the issue of the basic au- thority and responsibility of the Supreme Court to decide the major cases on separation of power. There was a case which the Supreme Court decided certiorari just a couple of weeks ago involving claims for damages brought by survivors and victims of September 11 against certain individuals in Saudi Arabia, and this case posed a classic conflict between ex- ecutive and legislative responsibilities. Congress had legislated under sovereign immunity in 1976 that tort claims, like flying an airplane into the World Trade Center, were an exception to sovereign immunity and the executive branch interposed objections to having that case decided because of the sensitivity of matters with Saudi Arabia. The case involved circuit splits and very, very important matters in that tragedy, which, you have commented, reached you, being very close to the incident. Do you not think that that is the kind of a case the Supreme Court should have heard to decide that kind of a very basic conflict between Article 1 powers of the Congress and Article 2 powers of the executive? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, obviously, issues related to Sep- tember 11 and national security are very important issues to the country as a whole. For the reasons I mentioned earlier, I lived through September 11, so I understand its great tragedy and effect on America. The question you asked me, though, is one that asks me to make judgment about an act the Supreme Court has done and I didn’t participate in their discussions. I didn’t review the cert petitions. I didn’t talk about with them their reasons. It would seem and is inappropriate to me to comment on a ques- tion that I wasn’t a party to in making the decision. Senator SPECTER. Well, would you not at least agree with a prop- osition that conflicts between the Congress and the executive branch are of the highest duty for the Supreme Court to consider and to decide? Judge SOTOMAYOR. All conflicts under the Constitution, all issues arising from the Constitution are important. Senator SPECTER. Well, I know that, but that is a pretty easy question to answer. I am not asking you to agree with Justice Rob- erts that the court ought to take more cases, which would seem, to me, to be pretty easy, or the question about Justice Scalia saying that there is turmoil when the circuits split and you do not have the Supreme Court taking cert. But is that not of the highest magnitude? Our discussions here have involved a great many issues, but I would suggest to you that on separation of powers and when you undertake the role of the Congress contrasted with the role of the President, Congress is Ar- ticle 1. It was placed with primacy because we are closest to the food bowl. And when you have a question, which you would not comment on yesterday, like the terror surveillance program, which flatly con- tradicts the congressional enactment of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, that the only way you get a wiretap is with court approval, and the cases declared unconstitutional in the Detroit district court and the sixth circuit dodges the case on standing or VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00452 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 441 very questionable grounds and the Supreme Court will not even hear it and you have a case involving September 11 and a very bla- tant conflict between Congress’ powers expressed under Article 1 with the Sovereign Immunities Act and the President stepping in under foreign powers, is that not a category of the highest mag- nitude? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It is so difficult to answer that question in the abstract. For the reason I’ve just explained, the issue is much, much more complicated than an absolute that says if a case pre- sents this question, I’m always going to take it. That’s not how a judge looks at the issue of granting or not granting certiorari, I assume, because the court is weighing so many different factors at the time that decision is made. Senator SPECTER. Judge, I do not want to interrupt you, but I have got a minute and a half left and there are a couple of com- ments I want to make in conclusion. I would ask you to rethink that and I would also ask you to rethink the issues you did not want to answer yesterday about con- flict between the Congress and the court. Even though the Con- stitution made Congress Article 1 and the President Article 2, the Supreme Court has really reversed the order. The judiciary is now really in Article 1, if the powers were to be redefined. But I would ask you to take a look. You have said repeatedly that the job of the court is to apply the law, not to make the law. Take a look again at the standard of proportional and congruent and see if you do not agree with Justice Scalia that that is another way for the court to make law. Take a look, too, at what Justice Roberts said here in the con- firmation hearings, that there would be deference and respect to congressional fact-finding and how that is not done in the Garrett case and in the voting rights case. Out of consideration for the people who are going to appear here later, I am not prepared yet to announce my own vote, but it is my hope that the conventional wisdom is very strong for your con- firmation, that you will use some of those characteristics of your litigation experience to battle out the ideas that you believe in, be- cause I have a strong hunch that they are closer to the ones that I would like to see adopted by the court. And do not let the issues of separation of powers skip by. The Congress is entitled to deference on these big issues and at least they ought to be decided by the court. Thank you very much, Judge Sotomayor. You have done quite an outstanding job as a witness. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator Specter. Judge, we are going to take a short break. Thank you for all of this. When we come back, I will recognize Senator Coburn, who is next. Thank you. [Whereupon, the hearing was recessed at 11:22 a.m.] After Recess [11:35 a.m.] Chairman LEAHY. Judge, thank you, and I do want to thank the press for cooperating. We have tried to make it possible for TV and print and photographers, and you have been very gracious in that regard. We are coming close to the end of this round. Whether it will be the last round or not will be up to the Republican side. But VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00453 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 442 I would yield now to Senator Coburn who has been waiting pa- tiently. Senator Coburn. Senator COBURN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Sotomayor, good morning again. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Good morning. Senator COBURN. Yesterday, when I was asking you about for- eign law, you said I should read your speech, so I did. I read your speech. So I want to come back to that for a minute because I want to ask you the same question I have asked the only other two Su- preme Court nominees that have come before the Committee while I have sat on this Committee. And I want to ask you the same question. My first statement yesterday was asking you about whether you disagreed with Alito and Thomas, and you said basi- cally you agreed. So on the basis of that agreement, will you affirm to this Com- mittee and the American public that, outside of where you are di- rected to do so through statute or through treaty, refrain from using foreign law in making the decisions that you make that affect this country and the opinions that you write? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I will not use foreign law to interpret the Constitution or American statutes. I will use American law, con- stitutional law to interpret those laws, except in the situations where American law directs a court. Senator COBURN. Thank you. I want to ask you also—another question that I asked both Justice Alito and Justice Thomas—and it is a problem I have with my colleagues here in the Senate. You have written extensively about some of the ambiguity that is in law. Would it be your opinion that we could do a much better job by being much clearer about what our intent is when we write stat- utes? Feel free to offend us, because we sorely need it. [Laughter.] Chairman LEAHY. Senator Coburn, speak for yourself. Senator COBURN. I am speaking for the vast majority of the American people. We do not do a thorough job in making clear our intent or the background of our intent when we—and I will give you an example. Two hundred and twenty times in the bill that just came out of the HELP Committee we gave full shrift to the Secretary of HHS to write all the regulations, without our intent, none of our intent. So as you sit, if you sit, on the Supreme Court, I am sure many of those are going to come before you without our intent but with a bureaucracy’s intent or an executive branch intent. So the question I am asking you: In your experience, since you have noted the ambiguity that is in the law, would you make it a recommendation to your friends you have now established, all 19 of us here on the Judiciary Committee, that we might do a better job of being much more clear in what we intend? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It would be presumptuous of me to tell you how to do your job, but I do know in my conversations virtually with all 89 Senators—perhaps not all of them, but the vast major- ity of them, somewhere in the conversation there was reference to their feelings, like yours, that a better job could be done by Con- gress in making its intent clearer. I think that that’s a question that Senators think about, at least the ones that I’ve spoken to. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00454 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 443 And I think that the process is always better for a court when Con- gress’ intent is more clearly stated. Senator COBURN. And there is no doubt in your mind that if we were much more clear, guidance would be better given to the Su- preme Court as conflicts over the statutes and laws come forward? Judge SOTOMAYOR. When Congress’ intent is clear, the Court ap- plies that clear intent. Senator COBURN. Thank you. I want to go back to a couple other areas that we talked about. One is some answers to questions that you gave to—questions from Senator Hatch. Senator Hatch asked you to describe your understanding of the test or standard that the Supreme Court uses to determine wheth- er a right should be considered fundamental. Specifically, he noted that when determining whether a right is fundamental, the Su- preme Court determined whether the right is deeply rooted in our Nation’s history and tradition, that it is necessarily to an Anglo- American regime of ordered liberty, or that it is an enduring Amer- ican tradition. You refused to answer him, asserting that you responded that you haven’t examined that framework in a while to know if that language is precise or not. ‘‘I’m not suggesting it’s not,’’ you said, ‘‘Senator, I just can’t affirm that description.’’ Similarly, you refused to describe to me the test the Court used to determine whether a right is a fundamental right. But, in contrast to that, when Senator Kaufman asked you to give a very detailed description of the fact the Court’s considering when determining the doctrine of stare decisis, you stated and went through a long litany of the items with which the Court uses with which to determine stare decisis. And you gave a fairly de- tailed analysis of that process and the doctrine of stare decisis. And so I ask you again: Why can’t you give us your description of what you think the parameters are that the Court uses to deter- mine a fundamental right in light of the 14th Amendment, incorpo- ration right? Judge SOTOMAYOR. All right. That language has been used in certain cases respecting the question of the incorporation of certain amendments. The question of—and the general framework will be used with respect to any consideration of incorporation. That wasn’t, I thought, the question that was being asked of me. I don’t remember that being the specific question. All I’m saying to you is that the framework has been discussed by the Court in jurispru- dence that’s developed over the last hundred years, subsequent to its established precedents on the Second Circuit. One of the questions that the Court will address if it decides to address the incorporation of the Second Amendment is whether in those related areas it will use or not use the doctrines or frame- work of that precedent. There may be arguments on one side why, on another side why not. What I’m trying to do is not prejudge an issue that is so pending before the—— Senator COBURN. Well, I am not asking you to prejudge the issue. I am asking you under what basis, what is the—what are the steps and the considerations, not the details of the case. In other words, you can describe that for us in terms of stare decisis, but you can’t describe that for us in terms of a fundamental right. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00455 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 444 And to me that is concerning because we should understand—that should be transparent to the people in this country how that works. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Because that’s the very issue the Court’s going to look at. The question of stare decisis is a general frame- work that one uses not in a particular context of a case, I am going to choose always to look at the outcome of the case in this way. It’s—— Senator COBURN. Your Honor, I understand that. If I can’t get you to go there, I want to quit and go on to something else, if I can. I also asked you yesterday—I want you to understand. You were raised in the Bronx. I was born in Wyoming and raised in Okla- homa. They are really different, both geographically and culturally, different areas. And so I want you to understand why I am spend- ing so much time talking with you about the Second Amendment. My constituents in Oklahoma understand, as do most Americans, that the right to own guns hangs in the balance, may very well hang in the balance with your ascendancy to the Supreme Court. For us, one wrong vote on what we consider—regardless of what you consider, but what we consider a fundamental right, could gut the holding of Heller. And I have some serious concerns on that issue, and I want to ask you a few more questions. Yesterday you said that clearly a constitutional right only works if you can enforce it. And I agree. Tell me how American citizens would be able to enforce their individual constitutional right to bear arms if you are holding that it does not apply to the States in your previous case at the appellate level becomes the law of the land. Judge SOTOMAYOR. The only statement I can start with is Malo- ney was decided on the basis of precedent. It was decided on prece- dent. The Supreme Court in Heller recognized that it’s precedent. It was based on Second Circuit precedent that had interpreted the constitutional—the Supreme Court’s prior precedent. It may well be—may not be—that Senator Hatch was right that the old precedent should be distinguished in a certain way. Others may be right that it shouldn’t. That issue was not the one that the Maloney court decided Maloney on. It decided it on the rule of law. It was a rule of law that led Judge Easterbrook in the Seventh Cir- cuit decision to say it is not what we should be doing; it is what the Supreme Court should do, is to re-examine a precedent that’s directly on point. I can assure your constituents that I have a completely open mind on this question. I do not close my mind to the fact and the understanding that there were developments after the Supreme Court’s rulings on incorporation that will apply to this question or be considered. I have a completely open mind. Senator COBURN. Do you not consider it ironic that the majority of the debate about the 14th Amendment in this country was about the taking of guns from freed slaves? Is that not ironic that we now have some kind of conflict that we are going to say that the whole reason and the debate about the 14th Amendment originated from States taking away the rights of people’s fundamental right to de- fend themselves? Is that not an irony to you? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00456 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 445 Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, would you want a judge or a nomi- nee who came in here and said, ‘‘I agree with you. This is unconsti- tutional’’ before I had a case before me, before I had both sides dis- cussing the issue with me, before I spent the time that the Su- preme Court spent on the Heller decision? And that decision was mighty long, went through 2 years of history, did a very thorough analysis and discussion back and forth on the prior opinions of the Committee. I don’t know that that’s a Justice that I can be. I can only come to this process—— Senator COBURN. I agree with you, Your Honor. I don’t want you to tell us how you’re going to rule. But I asked you: Isn’t it ironic that in this country where our law comes from Blackstone forward, comes from English law, which our founding was perpetrated and carried out under this fundamental right, and that we have a 14th Amendment right, and that we have through legal, what I would consider as a physician, schizophrenia have decided that we can’t decide whether this is a fundamental right? I will finish with that point other than to note the pressure ref- erence was to privilege and immunity, not due process. Judge SOTOMAYOR. I understand the importance of the right. It was recognized in Heller, and all I can continue to say, Senator, is I keep an open mind on the incorporation doctrine. Senator COBURN. I appreciate that, Your Honor. Thank you very much. Let me go back to an area that I know not everybody wants to hear about, but I think it is important. I asked you about where we were in terms of settled law on Roe and Doe, and today I only want to focus on Roe and Doe, not Casey. What was the state of the law, say, in 1974, 1 year after Roe? Where did we stand in that issue? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That women have the right to terminate their pregnancy in some situations, without Government regulation, and in others, there would be permissible Government regulation. Senator COBURN. Did any of the—— Judge SOTOMAYOR. That’s generally, because the Court did look at other questions in terms of Government regulation. Senator COBURN. Then let me ask you this: Did any of the laws of the 50 States regulating abortion survive the decision in Roe? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t know that I could answer that ques- tion because I don’t—— Senator COBURN. Okay. That’s fair. They didn’t. Was there any limit to the right to abortion either in the age of the child in the womb or the reasons for electing that surgery? And if so, what are those limits, according to Roe and Doe? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, I don’t actually remember the Court addressing that because my studies have been on the undue bur- den test established in Casey. So my experience in this area or my knowledge really has been most particularly concentrated on the Casey standard, which is—— Senator COBURN. I understand that. Judge SOTOMAYOR [continuing]. What Casey did was change the Roe standard. Senator COBURN. Which goes back to why I asked you those two hypothetical, not abstract but hypothetical cases yesterday, of the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00457 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 446 28-week and a 38-week infant. The truth is ever since January 22, 1973, you can have an abortion for any reason you want in this country. And even though Carhart II has now been ruled, that is, a procedure that will eliminate that pregnancy is still legal and viable everywhere in this country. And so what I was trying to draw out to you is where do we stand in this country when 80 percent of the rest of the world al- lows abortion only before 12 weeks—only before 12 weeks—and yet we allow it for any reason at any time for any inconvenience under the ‘‘health of the woman’’ aspect. And that is the other reason why I raised the viability because technology and the States’ interest under the Supreme Court ruling starts with viability. That is when a State can have interest. It is guaranteed, and there is limited ability States can have to control that after that. Is the Casey ruling, the undue burden ruling test, is that a policy choice? I know it is the supreme law of the land today, but in your mind, would that represent a policy choice? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I understood that that was the Court’s frame- work for addressing both the woman’s right to terminate her preg- nancy under the Constitution and the State’s rights to legislate and regulate in areas within its jurisdiction. So it was the Court’s way of attempting to address those two interests. Senator COBURN. And Justice Ginsburg is not real happy with those tests, and neither was—neither are several other members on the Court. I want to end up, our conversation when we had a private con- versation, I approached you about the importance of the cases that you would decide to take if you are on the Court. Let me ask you a few questions, and I just want your opinion. And this is not to put you in any box, and if you think it is, please say so, ‘‘You’re trying to put me in a box.’’ Do you believe that the Court’s abortion rulings have ended the national controversy over this issue? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No. Senator COBURN. Okay. You don’t have to name them, but do you think there are other similarly divisive issues that could be decided by the Court in the future? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That I can’t answer. I—— Senator COBURN. I don’t want you to name any. I am just saying as you think through your mind, do you think there are other simi- larly divisive issues that we could have that would divide the coun- try so remarkably—you know, assisted suicide, euthanasia? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I can only answer what exists. People are very passionate about the issues they believe in, and so almost any issue could find an audience or a part of our population that’s fer- vent about it. Senator COBURN. Which is a great answer, because on these divi- sive issues, is it better that the Court decides them or elected rep- resentatives? If you had a preference, if you were King tomorrow and you said we are going to decide this either in the Supreme Court or force Congress to make the decision, which would you think would be better for us? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00458 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 447 Judge SOTOMAYOR. In the first instance, it’s always Congress or State passing regulation that the Court is reviewing and deter- mining whether it complies with constitutional limits. It’s not a choice of either/or. It’s always Congress’ first instance or the State legislators’ first interest with the non-veto of a—— Senator COBURN. I have got 30 seconds left. I want to ask you another question. You said just a minute ago people are passionate about what they believe in. And I have read your speeches and your publications and your—and I believe you are passionate. And I believe your speeches reflect your passions. I look at myself when I give a speech. You know, I let it all go, what I really believe. I am more measured—some people wouldn’t believe that up here, but I am more measured when I am here. But when I give a speech—and the problem I am having is I really see a dissonance about what you said outside of your jurisprudence. And the only ability we have to judge is what that passion has re- layed in the past and your statements here in combination with your judicial practice. And so you are an admirable judge, an admirable woman. You have very high esteem in my eyes for both your accomplishments and your intellect. I have yet to decide where I am going on this because I am still deeply troubled because of the answers that I could not get in the 50 minutes that I have been able to ask, and also deeply troubled because I believe what you have spoken to the law students, what you have spoken in your writings truly reflect your real passions, which I sometimes find run in conflict with what I think the Constitution has to say. But I thank you for giving us such a cordial response, and I am mightily impressed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Thank you, Senator. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Coburn, the Republican side has asked for a third round of those who want another 10 min- utes, and so you will have a chance for more questions if you wish, because I am trying to be fair to both sides, and I will allow that. Before we go to Senator Franken, though, and while you are still here, Senator Coburn, I had reserved about 10 minutes of my time, and I will use just a minute or so of it. You spoke about the Second Amendment, which is a significant issue, and it is one people care about. And you spoke about gun owners out West and your life in both Wyoming and then Oklahoma. I look at that, of course, be- cause both Wyoming and Oklahoma have more restrictive gun laws than my own State of Vermont. I could say that virtually every State has more restrictive gun laws than we do in Vermont. I have been a gun owner since my early teens. I target-shoot at my home in Vermont as a way of relaxation all the time. I own nu- merous weapons, hand guns and long guns. I have not heard any- thing or read anything in the judge’s writings or speeches that would indicate to me that in any way I have to worry that Vermont gun owners—and many Vermonters are gun owners; it is a way of life—that that is going to change. It is not going to change for me. It is not going to change what weapons my two sons, one a former Marine, own. If Judge Sotomayor is on the Supreme Court, I expect VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00459 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 448 I will still be back in my home—and you are welcome any time you would like to come and go target shooting with me there. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Chairman, I would just say briefly but it is a real pivotal time we are in. If the decision by Judge Sotomayor becomes law, any city—maybe not Vermont, but any city or State in America could virtually, I believe, fully ban all firearms. And that is just where we are, and we can discuss how much precedent had to bound you to reach that conclusion. But this is not a little bitty issue. It is very important. Chairman LEAHY. But States made laws as they have gone along. Vermont has decided not to have the restrictive laws that you have in Alabama. But States have made up their mind. Senator Franken. Senator FRANKEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a letter here from several former U.S. attorneys from the Southern District of New York. Some of them Republican appointed and supporting the judge’s confirmation. I will read a little bit from it. It says they each had personal experience including appearing before Judge Sotomayor. She came to our cases without any appar- ent bias, probed counsel actively with insightful and at times tough questions and demonstrated time and again that she not only lis- tens, but is often persuaded by counsel. In our matters, Judge Sotomayor’s opinions reflect clear—it is great. It is a great letter. I would ask that it be entered into the record. Sir? Can I enter it into the record? Thank you. Thank you, Judge Sotomayor, for your patience and your terrific answers. We have heard a lot about your thoughts on specific cases and on principles of jurisprudence. I would like to ask a much more general question and one that I think is a really good question at job interviews. That is why do you want to be a Supreme Court Justice? Judge SOTOMAYOR. You are going to hate me for taking a few minutes, but can I tell you a story? Senator FRANKEN. I would love it. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Because it will explain who I am and why. When Senator Moynihan first told me that he would consider send- ing my name to Senator D’Amato for consideration as a District Court judge, he asked me to keep it quiet for a little bit of time and I asked permission to tell my mom, Omar. This is short. So they were visiting and I told them and mom was very, very excited. She then said how much more money are you going to earn? I stopped and I said I’m going to take a big pay cut. Then she stopped and she stopped and she said, are you going to do as much foreign travel as you do now? I was flying all over the U.S. and abroad as part of my private practice work. I said probably not because I am going to live in a courthouse in lower Manhattan near where I used to work as a Manhattan DA. Now the pause was a little longer. She said, Okay. Then she said, now all the fascinating clients that you work with, as you may have heard yesterday, I had some fairly well known clients, you are going to be able to go traveling with them with the new people you meet, right? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00460 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 449 I said, no. Most of them are going to come before me as litigants to the cases I am hearing and I cannot become friends with them. Now the pause is really long. She finally looked up and she said, why do you want this job? And Omar, who was sitting next to her said, Selena, you know your daughter. This is in Spanish. You know your daughter and her stuff with public service. It really has always been the answer. Given who I am, my love of the law, my sense of importance about the rule of law, how central it is to the functioning of our society, how it sets us apart as many Senators have noted, from the rest of the world, have always created a passion in me. That passion led me to want to be a lawyer first and now to be a judge because I can’t think of any greater service that I can give to the country than to be permitted the privilege of being a Justice of the Supreme Court. Senator FRANKEN. Thank you. Well, I for one have been very im- pressed with you, Judge, and I certainly intend to support your confirmation for the court. I guess there is another round. I thought I was going to be the only thing between you and the door. So I planned to just yield all the rest of my time. But since I am not I would like to ask you— no. I am going to yield the rest of my time if that is okay. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you very much, Senator Franken. I will reserve my time. We will have—Senator Sessions has asked us. Ten minute rounds. I think they will be primarily on the Repub- lican side. I may speak again when they finish. We will begin with you, Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Leahy. I be- lieve we have tried to meet our goal. I had a goal at the beginning and people would say this is one of the most fair and effective hear- ings we have ever had. I hope that has been the case. It is a great issue, the choice of putting someone on the United States Supreme Court. Our nominee has a wonderful group of friends and a long and distinguished record, but a number of ques- tions arose that are important. American people rightly are concerned that on important social issues that are not clearly stated in the Constitution on important legal issues not clearly stated in our law seem to be decided by unelected lifetime appointed courts. Those are big, big issues that we have discussed here today I hope in a way that is healthy and positive. Judge, one thing I will ask you, I asked Justice Roberts and I am not sure how much good it did because he came back asking for a pay raise the next week, I think. But can you live on that sal- ary that you are paid? We are having the largest deficit in the his- tory of the Republic. A lot of people are going to have to tighten their belts. Are you prepared to do so also? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I have been living on the salary for 17 years, so I will suffer through more of it. It is difficult for many judges. The pay question is a significant one for judges who haven’t re- ceived pay raises I think it is more than 20 years now if I am not mistaken. Senator SESSIONS. Well, you are saying pay raises based on— they are getting pay raises almost every year really, the cost of liv- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00461 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 450 ing and that kind of thing. But there was a big pay raise about 20 years ago. I think that it is about four times the average family income in America. I hope that you can live on it. If not, you probably shouldn’t take the job. All judges, whether they are activists or not, if asked are going to say they follow the law. They just have a different view of the law. They just have a more looser interpretation of the law. So that is why we press some of these issues. We want to determine as best we can just how tightly you be- lieve you are bound by the law and how much flexibility you might think that you have as a judge to expand the law to suit perhaps a—in some policy area or another. Attorney General Holder recently said that he thought we lacked courage in discussing the race issue. I think that is something that we should take seriously. That was a valid comment. In my opinion, we had a higher level of discussion of that issue since I have been in this committee and I hope we have done it in a way that’s correct. This is so sensitive and it is so important and we need to get it right and we must be fair to everybody. We know that there are cases when people have been discrimi- nated against. They are entitled to a remedy and the Supreme Court has been quite clear that when you can show a history of dis- crimination, and we have had not just in the south, but in the south, the jurisprudence has developed that it is appropriate for a judge to have a remedy that would encourage a move forward to a better opportunity those who have been held back. So that is good. But the Supreme Court has also said that this is a dangerous philosophy because when you do that, you have identified one ra- cial group and you have given them a preference over another. So it can be done in a legitimate way that is remedial. We still have vestiges of discrimination still in our society and there will still be needs for remedial remedies. But I do think, as Justice Roberts said, the best way to end discrimination is quit doing it. A lot of our orders and court decisions are such that they benefit one race over another solely because of their race. It has to be tied to a remedy. The Supreme Court has made clear that when you do that, it must meet the highest scrutiny as the courts are supposed to review that very carefully and the language they use is strict scrutiny. You don’t favor one group over another without meeting that high standard. I am glad we began to discuss that and we will have the firefighters and they will be able to express their view on it in a little bit. Judge, let me just say before I go forward that you have done a good job. You have a good humor, you have been direct in your an- swers and we appreciate that. I will not support, and I do not think any member of this side will support a filibuster or any attempt to block a vote on your nomination. It is a very important vote. We all need to take our time and think it through and cast it honestly as the occasion de- mands. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00462 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 451 But I look forward to you getting that vote before we recess in August. Let me discuss, Judge, I will just express this as we go forward. In your handling of the Ricci case, I think it is fair to say that it was not handled in the regular order. You said in your opening statement that, ‘The process of judging is enhanced when the arguments and concerns of the parties through litigation are understood and acknowledged and that is why I generally structure my opinions by setting out what the law requires and then by explaining why a contrary position, sympa- thetic or not, is accepted or rejected. That is how I seek to strength- en both the rule of law and faith in the impartiality of our justice system.’ I think that is a good statement. But I think what the panel did in this case did not meet that standard. I think it was action I would conclude fairly, I think, contrary to the rule to the Second Circuit, Rule 32–1 says that summary or- ders are only appropriate where ‘a decision is unanimous and each judge of the panel believes no jurisprudential purpose would be served by an opinion.’ Your clerk of your court there to the New York Times said this order ‘Ordinarily issues when the termination of the case revolves around well settled principles of law.’ I would note that it was not a pro curium opinion at first. It was a summary order which is even less of an impactful decision than the other. But I think the Supreme Court made clear and I think most Americans understand that the firefighters case was more than that. It had tremendous jurisprudential impact and I think you were wrong to attempt to use the summary order which be- cause it was objected to within your circuit which resulted in a pretty roaring debate and discussion and that you went forward, you then did it in a pro curium way, which at least gave it a little higher credence, but you did not write an in-depth opinion at all. In fact, it was still a pro curium and short opinion. I understand according to some of the writers that Judge Sack, New York Times, I believe, quoted—National Journal that he was most reluctant to join the opinion. Judge Pooler was in the middle, and I guess it didn’t reference the third judge, but apparently you were the third judge that was pushing for this kind of result. Did you fail to show the courage that Attorney General Holder has asked us to show and discuss this issue openly with an in- depth opinion and wouldn’t we have been better off if the case hand been handled in that fashion? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Sir, no. I didn’t show a lack of courage. The court’s decision was clear in both instances on the basis for the de- cision. It was a thorough, complete discussion of the issues as pre- sented to the District Court. The Circuit Court’s ruling was clear in both instances. No, I did not lack courage. Senator SESSIONS. Well, I don’t think it was a great District Court opinion, so I would disagree on that. Mr. Chairman, you have been fair to us throughout. I do not know that every member of our side would use the time that they are allotted, but I am glad that you are allowing them the opportunity to do so. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00463 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 452 Chairman LEAHY. Thank you for that compliment, Senator. I should compliment Senator Specter here when he was Chairman I was Ranking Member and we had two Supreme Court nomina- tions. We tried to work out a time to be fair to everybody and we did and we were told by both Republicans and Democrats that no- body had to complain about the amount of time. I have tried to do the same thing. It is a lifetime appointment. I have been very impressed of course with our nominee and that has been obvious. Incidentally, she was originally nominated by President H. W. Bush and then by President Bill Clinton and now by President Barack Obama. President Clinton nominated her to the Second Circuit and I have a letter addressed to the members of the committee, well, ac- tually to you and I, Senator Sessions, from former President Clin- ton. He speaks of her being able to make a unique contribution to the bench through her experience as a prosecutor and trial judge and hopes that we will have a speedy confirmation of her. I will put that in the record. One of the things in also trying to make sure everybody gets a balanced time, but we have had a lot of us that have served as ei- ther Chairman or Ranking Member of this committee and we know how important that is. I use that to yield to Senator Hatch who has had also the problem of having to schedule how things go. I yield to you. But thank you, Jeff, I appreciate that. Senator HATCH. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I echo Jeff’s statement here. Judge, you have been great throughout this process and I appre- ciate it, but I have some questions that I’d like to ask that I think you can answer yes or no, of course you can qualify if you feel like it. But I would like to get through these because they are impor- tant questions to me and millions of other people that I represent. Judge, from 1980 from 1992 you were actively involved with the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Educational Fund. It is a well known Civil rights organization in our country. Among many other activities, this group files briefs in Supreme Court cases. You served in nearly a dozen different leadership posi- tions there, including serving on and chairing a litigation com- mittee. The New York Times has described you as a ‘tough policymaker’ with the group and said that you would meet frequently with the legal staff, review the status of cases and played an active role in the fund’s litigation. Lawyers of the fund described you as, ‘An involved and ardent supporter of their various legal efforts during your time with the group.’ The Associated Press looked at documents from your service with the fund that showed that you were, ‘involved in making sure that the cases handled were in keeping with its mission statement and were having an impact.’ When Senator Gillibrand introduced you to this committee on Monday, she compared your leadership role at the fund to Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s participation in the ACLU Women’s Rights Project or Justice Thurgood Marshall’s participation on behalf of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00464 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 453 So let me ask you just about a few abortion cases in which the Fund filed briefs. I do believe you can answer these yes or no, but again, certainly qualify if you feel like it. I am not asking for your present views, either personal or legal, let’s get that straight, on these issues, nor am I asking you how you might rule on these issues in the future. I just want to make that clear. I might say that these are important issues. In one case, Wemus v. Lavars and Harris v. McCray, the Fund joined an Amicus brief asking the Supreme Court to overturn restrictions on taxpayer funding for abortion. The brief compared refusing to use Medicaid Funds to pay for abortions to the Dred Scott case, the Dred Scott v. Sanford decision that refused citizenship to black people in our society and treated them terribly. At the time, did you know that the Fund was filing this brief? At the time did you know—well, let me just ask each one. At the time, did you know the fund was filing this brief? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No, sir. Senator HATCH. At the time, did you know that the brief made this argument? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No, sir. Senator HATCH. At the time did you support the Fund filing this brief that made this argument? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No. Senator HATCH. At the time did you voice any concern, objection, disagreement or doubt about the Fund filing this brief or making this argument? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I was not like Justice Ginsburg or Justice Marshall. I was not a lawyer on the Fund as they were with re- spect to the organizations they belong to. I was a board member and it was not my practice and not that I know of any board mem- ber, although maybe one with Civil Rights experience would have. I didn’t have any in this area, so I never reviewed the briefs. Senator HATCH. All right. In another case, Ohio v. Aquin Center for Reproductive Health, the Fund argued that the First Amend- ment right to freely exercise religion undermines laws requiring parental notification for minors getting abortion. Now, at the time did you know that the Fund was filing this brief? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No. No specific brief. Obviously it was in- volved in litigation, so I knew generally they were filing briefs. But I wouldn’t know until after the fact that the brief was actually filed. But I wouldn’t review it. Senator HATCH. The same questions on this. At the time did you know that the brief made this argument? At this time did you sup- port the Fund filing this brief that made this argument? And at the time did you voice any concern, objection, disagreement or doubt about the Fund filing this brief or making this argument? Judge SOTOMAYOR. No because I never reviewed the brief. Senator HATCH. That’s fine. I’m just going to establish this. In another case, Planned Parenthood v. Casey, the Fund argued against a 24-hour waiting period for obtaining an abortion. So again, those questions. At the time did you know that the Fund VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00465 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 454 was filing this brief? Did you know that the brief made this argu- ment? Did you support the Fund filing this brief that made this ar- gument? And did you voice any concern, objection, disagreement or doubt about the Fund filing this brief or making this argument? Judge SOTOMAYOR. For the same reason, no. Senator HATCH. Now, Judge, I am going to be very easy on you now because I invited constituents in Utah to submit questions and got an overwhelming response. Many of them submitted questions about the Second Amendment and other issues that have already been discussed. One constituent asked whether you see the courts, especially the Supreme Court as an institution for resolving perceived social in- justices and equities and disadvantages. Now, please address this both in terms of a Justice’s intention and the effect of their decisions. That was the question and I thought it was an interesting question. Judge SOTOMAYOR. No, that’s not the role of the courts. The role of the courts is to interpret the law as Congress writes it. It may be the effect in a particular situation that in the court doing that and giving effect to Congress’ intent, it has that outcome. But it is not the role of the judge to create that outcome. It is to interpret what Congress is doing and do what Congress wants. Senator HATCH. Great. One final question, Judge. Describe your judicial philosophy in terms of the phrase ‘Fidelity to the Law.’ Would you agree with me that both majority and descending Jus- tices in last year’s gun rights decision in District of Columbia v. Heller were doing their best to be faithful to the text and history of the Second Amendment? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Text and history, how to analyze, yes. Senator HATCH. In other words, do you believe that they were ex- hibiting fidelity to the law as they understood it? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes. Senator HATCH. Then I take it that you would agree that the Justices in the majority were not engaging in some kind of right wing judicial activists in the—characterized the decision. Is that fair to say? Judge SOTOMAYOR. It is fair to me to say that I do not view what a court does as activism. I view it as each judge principally inter- preting the issue before them on the basis of the law. Senator HATCH. Great. Let me just ask you one other constituent question. It is a short one. Another constituent asked, which is more important or deserves more weight? The constitution as it was originally intended or newer legal precedent? Judge SOTOMAYOR. What governs always is the Constitution. Senator HATCH. Which is more important or deserves more weight? The actual wording of the Constitution as it was originally intended or newer legal precedent? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The intent of the founders were set forth in the Constitution. They created the words, they created the docu- ment. It is their words that is the most important aspect of judg- ing. You follow what they said in their words and you apply it to the facts you are looking at. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00466 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 455 Senator HATCH. Thank you, Judge. I will give back the remain- der of my time, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. I just would note we do have this letter in the record from the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund in which they say neither the board as a whole nor any individual member selects litigation to be undertaken or controls ongoing liti- gation. I just think that we should be very, very clear here. It is prob- ably why they get support from the United Way and a number of other organizations. Senator Grassley. Senator GRASSLEY. Good morning, Justice—Judge Sotomayor. Yesterday you said you would take a look at Baker v. Nelson, so I will ask this question. You said you hadn’t read Baker in a long time and would report back. You added that if Baker was prece- dent, you would uphold it based upon stare decisis consistent with your stance in cases like Kato, Roe v. Wade, Griswold, and many others that you mentioned this week. Baker involved an appeal from the Minnesota Supreme Court which held that a Minnesota law prohibiting same sex marriage did not violate the First, the Eighth, the Ninth, or the 14th amend- ment to the Constitution. The Supreme Court in a very short rul- ing concluded on its merits that, ‘‘The appeal is dismissed for want of substantial Federal question.’’ Baker remains on the books as precedent. Will you respect the Court’s decision in Baker based upon stare decisis? And if not, why not? Judge SOTOMAYOR. As I indicated yesterday, I didn’t remember Baker, and if I had studied it, it would have been in law school. You raised a question, and I did go back to look at Baker. In fact, I don’t think I ever read it, even in law school. Baker was decided at the time where jurisdiction over Federal questions was mandatory before the Supreme Court, and the dis- position by the Supreme Court, I believe was what you related, Senator, which is a dismissal of the appeal raised on the Minnesota statute. What I have learned is the question of—it’s what the meaning of that dismissal is, is actually an issue that’s being debated in ex- isting litigation. As I indicated yesterday, I will follow precedent according to the doctrine of stare decisis. I can’t prejudge what that precedent means until the issue comes before—what a prior deci- sion of the Court means and its applicability to a particular issue is until that question is before me as a judge—or a Justice, if that should happen. So, at bottom, because the question is pending before a number of courts, the ABA would not permit me to comment on the merits of that. But as I indicated, I affirm that with each holding of the Court, to the extent it is pertinent to the issues before the Court, it has to be given the effects of stare decisis. Senator GRASSLEY. Am I supposed to interpret what you just said as anything different than what you said over the last 3 days in regard to Kato or Roe or Griswold or any other precedent you said, or precedents? Or would it be exactly in the same tone as you men- tioned in previous days with previous precedents under stare deci- sis? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00467 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 456 Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, those cases have holdings that are not open to dispute. The holdings are what they are. Their application to a particular situation will differ on what facts those situations present. The same thing with the Nelson case, which is what does the holding mean, and that’s what I understand is being litigated, because it was a one-line decision by the Supreme Court, and how it applies to a new situation is what also would come before a court. Senator GRASSLEY. Okay. My last question for your appearance before our Committee involves a word I don’t think that showed up here yet—‘‘vacuums’’—and it is a question that I asked Judge Rob- erts and Justice Alito, and it comes from a conversation I had, a dialog I had at a similar hearing when Judge Souter was before us, now Justice Souter, involving the term ‘‘vacuums in law.’’ And I think the term ‘‘vacuums in law’’ comes from Souter himself, as I will read to you in just a moment. I probed Judge Souter about how he would interpret the Con- stitution and statutory law. In his response, Justice Souter talked about the Court filling vacuums left by Congress, and there are several quotes that I can give you from 19—I guess it was 1990, but I will just read four or five lines of Judge Souter speaking to this Committee: ‘‘Because if, in fact, the Congress will face the responsibility that goes with its 14th Amendment powers, then by definition, there is, to that extent, not going to be a kind of vacuum of responsibility created, in which the courts are going to be forced to take on prob- lems which sometimes, in the first instance, might be better ad- dressed by the political branches of Government.’’ Both prior to that and after that, Judge Souter talked a lot about maybe the courts needed to fill vacuums. Do you agree with Justice Souter, is it appropriate for the courts to fill vacuums in the law? And let me quickly follow it up. Do you expect that you will fill in vacuums in the law left by Congress if you are confirmed to be an Associate Justice? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator Grassley, one of the things I say to my students when I’m teaching brief writing, I start by saying to them, ‘‘It’s very dangerous to use analogies because they’re always imperfect.’’ I wouldn’t ever use Justice Souter’s words because they’re his words, not mine. I try always to use—and this is what I tell my students to do, is use simple words. Explain what you’re doing without analogy. Just tell them what you’re doing. And what I do is not described in the way—or I wouldn’t describe it in the way Justice Souter did. Judges apply the law, they apply the holdings of precedent, and they look at how that fits into the new facts before them. But you’re not creating law. If that was an intent that Justice Souter was expressing—and I doubt it—that’s not what judges do. Judges do what I’ve just described, and that’s not in my mind acting for Congress. It is interpreting Congress’ intent as expressed in a stat- ute and applying it to the new situation. Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you. I am done, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you very much, Senator Grassley. Senator Kyl, did you want another round? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00468 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 457 Senator KYL. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am not sure how long this will take, but, Judge, I think maybe we are—to use the President’s analogy that we talked about in my very first question to you, we may be in about the 25th mile of the marathon, and I might even be persuaded to have a little empathy for this last mile here. I think you are just about done. I wanted to go over three quick things, if I could. The first is the exchange that we had this morning regarding the decision in Ricci in which you insisted that you were bound by Supreme Court and Second Circuit precedent. I quoted from the Supreme Court deci- sion to the effect that I believe that that contradicted your answer. If you have anything different to say than what you said this morning, I wanted to give you another opportunity to say it. We don’t need to re-plow the same ground. But is there anything dif- ferent that you would like to offer on that? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Senator, after each round, I go to the next moment. Without actually looking at the transcript, I couldn’t an- swer that question. It is just impossible to right now. I’m glad you’re giving me the opportunity, but I would need a specific ques- tion as to something I said and what I meant before I could re- spond. Senator KYL. All right. Since we will probably have a few ques- tions as follow-up in writing and you will be providing us answers to those, maybe the best thing is just to ask a general question, or if there is something specific that I can related it to, and then you can respond in that way. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Thank you, sir. Senator KYL. You are very welcome. Now, the second question has to do with the Second Amendment. In the Maloney case, you held that it was not incorporated into the 14th Amendment, and what—well, maybe I should ask you what that means. Let me ask then two separate situations as a practical matter. If the Supreme Court does not review that issue, then is it the case that at least in the Second Circuit and the Seventh Circuit, the States that are in the Seventh and Second Circuit, those States could pass laws that restrict or even prohibit people from owning firearms? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I did not hold it was not incorporated. I was on a panel that—— Senator KYL. Fair enough. Judge SOTOMAYOR.—viewed Supreme Court precedent and Sec- ond Circuit precedent as holding that fact. Senator KYL. Right. Judge SOTOMAYOR. You can’t talk in an absolute. There always has to be a reason for why a State acts, and there also has to be a reason for the extent of the regulation the State passes. And so the question in Maloney for us was a very narrow question, which was: Are these nunchuk sticks—and I have described them pre- viously as these martial arts sticks tied together by a belt that when you swing them, if somebody comes by, there could be, if not serious, deadly force in some situations—whether the State had a reason recognized in law for determining that it was illegal to own those sticks. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00469 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 458 The next issue that would come up by someone who challenged the regulation would be, What’s the nature of the regulation and how does it comport with the reason the State gives for the actions it did? So absolute regulation is not what I would answer. I would an- swer what this—— Senator KYL. Let me—excuse me. Judge SOTOMAYOR.—regulation is. Senator KYL. I appreciate your answer. What would be the test that would be applied by a court in the event that a State said be- cause of the danger that firearms present to others, we are going to require that only law enforcement personnel can own firearms in our State? And someone challenged that as an affront to their rights, they would say the Federal Government can’t take that right away from us because of the Second Amendment. What would the test be that the Court would apply to analyze the regulation of the State? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, that’s very similar, although not ex- actly, if I understood it, to Heller, the facts in Heller. And the Court there said that the regulation in D.C. was broader than the inter- est asserted. That question in a different State would depend on the cir- cumstances of its barring—— Senator KYL. Well, excuse me for interrupting. Is there no stand- ard—I mean, we are familiar with strict scrutiny, the reasonable basis test and so on. Is there a standard of which you are aware that the Court would use to examine the State’s right to impose such a restriction given that the Second Amendment would be deemed not incorporated? Judge SOTOMAYOR. In Maloney, the Court addressed whether there was a violation of the equal protection statute—equal protec- tion of the 14th Amendment, and determined that rational basis review—now that I understand that you are asking about—— Senator KYL. Sure. I am sorry. I didn’t—— Judge SOTOMAYOR.—a standard of review that’s—— Senator KYL. Now, of the tests that the Court applies tradition- ally, the rational basis is the least difficult of States to meet in jus- tifying a regulation, is it not? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I’m not going to be difficult with you. It’s the one where you don’t need an exact fit between the exact injury that you are seeking to remedy in the legislation. Senator KYL. Could I—— Judge SOTOMAYOR. So it does have more—— Senator KYL. Flexibility for the state? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, ‘‘flexibility’’ is the wrong—more def- erence to congressional findings about what—— Senator KYL. Or State law. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Exactly. Senator KYL. Right. You know the general rule that the rational basis test is the least intrusive on a State’s ability to regulate, whereas strict scrutiny is the most intrusive on the State’s ability. Is that a fair characterization? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00470 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 459 Judge SOTOMAYOR. It’s a fair characterization that when you have strict scrutiny, the Government’s legislation must be very narrowly tailored. Senator KYL. Right. So—— Judge SOTOMAYOR. In rational basis there is a broader breadth for the States to act. Senator KYL. So wouldn’t it be correct to say that as between the application of the Second Amendment to the District of Columbia, for example, compared to a situation in which a State or a city im- posed a regulation on the control of firearms, that it would be much more likely that the Court would uphold the State’s ability or the city’s ability to regulate that than it would—in the abstract I am talking about here—than it would a Federal attempt to regu- late it under the Second Amendment? Judge SOTOMAYOR. That’s the problem within the abstract, be- cause what the Court would look at is whatever legislature—State legislative findings there are in the fit between those findings and the legislation. Senator KYL. Right, and I appreciate that you are not going to— without knowing the facts of every case, you can’t opine. But just as a general proposition, obviously if the amendment is incor- porated, it will be much more difficult for a government to impose a standard than if it is not incorporated. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Well, the standard of review, even under the incorporation doctrine, was actually not decided in Heller, and that issue wasn’t resolved. So what that answer will be is actually an open question that I couldn’t even discuss in a broad term other than to just explain—— Senator KYL. All right. Again, to interrupt, because we are less than 2 minutes now. If Senator Leahy says, gee, in Vermont, he is not worried about the fact that the Second Amendment isn’t in- corporated, maybe if I lived in New York or Massachusetts or some other State I would be worried. The question I guess I would ask here is: Can you understand why someone who would like to own a gun would be concerned that if the amendment is not deemed in- corporated into the 14th Amendment as a fundamental right, that it would be much more likely that the State or city in which that individual lived could regulate his right to own a firearm? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Very clear to me from the public discussions on this issue that that is a concern for many people. Senator KYL. Final question. You are familiar—this goes to the foreign law issue. You are familiar with the difference in the treat- ment of foreign law by the U.S. Supreme Court in Kennedy v. Lou- isiana on the one hand and in Roper v. Simmons on the other hand. In Roper, the Court ruled it was cruel and unusual to apply the death penalty and drew substantially on foreign law. In Ken- nedy v. Louisiana, an adult was convicted of raping an 8-year-old child. And the same five Justices who wrote the opinion in Roper ruled that it was cruel and unusual to sentence the individual to death, but cited no foreign law whatsoever. Some have said that a discussion of foreign law was left out of the Kennedy case because it actually cut against the majority’s opinion. What do you think? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00471 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 460 Judge SOTOMAYOR. I can’t speak for what they did. I can only do what you did, which is to describe what the courts did and what they said. It’s impossible for me to speak about why a particular court acted in a particular way or why a particular Justice ana- lyzed an issue outside of what the opinion says. Senator KYL. I will just tell you my view is it kind of tells me that if a court can find some foreign law that supports its opinion, it might use it. If the opinion is on the other side, then it doesn’t. In my view, that is one of the problems with using foreign law, and I gather from what you said earlier you don’t think the Court should use foreign law either except in cases of treaty and other similarly appropriate cases. Judge SOTOMAYOR. I do not believe that foreign law should be used to determine the result under constitutional law or American law, except where American law directs. Senator KYL. Thank you very much. Thank you, Judge. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Graham. Senator GRAHAM. Thank you, Judge, I guess we do get to talk again. When you look at the fundamental right aspect of the Sec- ond Amendment, you will be looking at precedent, you will be look- ing at our history, you will be looking at a lot of things. Hopefully, you talk to your godchild, who is an NRA member. You can assimilate your view of what America is all about when it comes to the Second Amendment. But one thing I want you to know is that Russ Feingold and Lindsey Graham have reached the same conclusion. So that speaks strong of the Second Amendment, because we do not reach the same conclusion a lot. So I just want you to realize that this fundamental right issue of the Second Amendment is very important to people throughout the country, whether you own a gun or not, and it is one of those things that I think, when you look at it, you will find that America, unlike other countries, has a unique relationship with the Second Amendment. Today, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed is appearing in a military tri- bunal in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. He will be appearing before a military judge and he will be represented by military lawyers and there will be a military prosecutor. The one thing I want to say here is that I have been a judge ad- vocate, a member of the military legal community, for well over 25 years and to America and the world who may be watching this, I have nothing but great admiration and respect for those men and women who serve in our judge advocate corps who will be given the obligation by our nation to render justice against people like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. I just want to say this, also, on this historic day. To those who wonder why we do this, why do we give him a trial? Why are we so concerned about him having his day in court? Why do we give him a lawyer when we know what he would do to our people in his hands? I would just like to say that it makes us better than him. It makes us stronger for us to give the mastermind of 9/11 his day in court, represented by counsel, and any verdict that comes his VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00472 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 461 way will not be based on prejudice or passion or religious bigotry. It will be based on facts. Now, let us talk about what this nation is facing. This Congress, Judge, is trying to reauthorize the Military Commission Act, trying to find a way to bring justice to the enemies of this country in a way that will make us better in the eyes of the world and, also, make us safer here at home. Have you had an opportunity to look at the Boumediene, Hamdan, Hamdi, Rasul cases? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I have. Senator GRAHAM. You will be called upon in the future, if you get on the court, to pass some judgment over the enactments of Con- gress. When it comes to civilian criminal law, do you know of any concept in civilian law that would allow someone to be held, in criminal law, indefinitely without trial? Judge SOTOMAYOR. When you’re talking about civilian criminal law, you’re talking about—— Senator GRAHAM. Domestic criminal law. Judge SOTOMAYOR.—domestic criminal prosecution. Senator GRAHAM. Right. Judge SOTOMAYOR. After conviction, defendants are often sen- tenced—— Senator GRAHAM. I am talking about you are held in jail without a trial. Judge SOTOMAYOR. The Speedy Trial Act and there are constitu- tional principles that require a speedy trial. So in answer, no, there is no—— Senator GRAHAM. That is a correct statement of the law, Judge, in my opinion. You cannot hold someone in domestic criminal set- tings indefinitely without trial. Under military law, the law of armed conflict, is there any re- quirement to try, in a court of law, every enemy prisoner? Judge SOTOMAYOR. There, you have an advantage on me, because I—I’m sorry. Senator GRAHAM. Fair enough. The point I am trying to make, and check if I am wrong, you will have some time to do this, as I understand military law, if we, as a nation, one of our airman is downed on a foreign land, held by an adversary, it is my under- standing we cannot demand, under the Geneva Convention, that that airman or American soldier go to a civilian court. That is not the law. If we have a pilot in the hands of the enemy, there is no requirement of the detaining force to take that airman before a civilian judge. I think that is the law. There is no requirement under military or the law of armed con- flict to have civilian judges review the status of our prisoners. That is a right that we do not possess. The question for the country and the world, if people operate out- side the law of armed conflict that do not wear uniforms, are they going to get a better deal than people that play by the rules? As we discuss these matters, I hope you take into account that there is no requirement to try everyone held as an enemy prisoner. Do you believe that there is a requirement in the law that at a cer- tain point in time, that a prisoner has to be released, an enemy prisoner, just through the passage of time? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00473 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 462 Judge SOTOMAYOR. I can only answer that question narrowly, and narrowly because the court’s holdings have been narrow in this area. First, military commissions and proceedings under them have been a part of the country’s history. And so there’s no question that they are appropriate in certain circumstances. Senator GRAHAM. And, Judge, they will have to render justice. They will have to meet the standards of who we are. My point to some critics on the right who have objected to my view that we ought to provide more capacity is that wherever the flag flies, in whatever courtroom, there is something attached to that flag. So we are going to work hard to create a military commission consistent with the values of this country. But I just want to let you know that under traditional military law, it is not required to let someone go who is properly detained as part of the enemy force because of the passage of time. Judge, it would be crazy for us to capture someone, give them adequate due process, independent judicial review, and the judges agree with the military, ‘‘You’re part of al Qaeda, you represent a danger,’’ and say, at a magic point in time, ‘‘Good luck, you can go now.’’ The people that we are fighting, if some of them are let go, they are going to try to kill us all and it does not make us a better na- tion to put a burden upon ourselves that no one else has ever ac- cepted. So my goal, working with my colleagues, is to have a rational system of justice that will make sure that every detainee has a chance to make the argument, ‘‘I am being improperly held,’’ have a day in court, have a review by an independent judiciary, but we do not take it so far that we can not keep an al Qaeda member in jail until they die, because some of them deserve to be in jail until they die. I want the world to understand that America is not a bad place because we will hold al Qaeda members under a process that is fair, transparent, until they die. My message to those who want to join this organization or thinking about joining it is that you can get killed if you join and you may wind up dying in jail. As this country and this Congress comes to grips with how to deal with an enemy that does not wear a uniform, that does not follow any rules, that would kill everybody they could get their hands on in the name of religion, that not only we focus, Senator Whitehouse, on upholding our values, that we focus on the threat that this country faces in an unprecedented manner. So, Judge, my last words to you will be if you get on this court and you look at the Military Commission Act that the Congress is about pass, when you look at whether or not habeas should be ap- plied to a wartime battlefield prison, please remember, Judge, that we are not talking about domestic criminals who robbed a liquor store. We are talking about people who have signed up for a cause every bit as dangerous as any enemy this country has ever faced and that this Congress, the voice of the American people who stand for reelection has a very difficult assignment on its hands. There are lanes for the executive branch, the judicial branch and the congressional branch, even in a time of war. Please, Judge, un- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00474 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 463 derstand that 535 Members of Congress cannot be the commander in chief and that unelected judges cannot run the war. Thank you and Godspeed. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Thank you, Senator. Chairman LEAHY. Senator Cornyn. Senator CORNYN. You are almost through, Judge. I just want to ask three relatively quick items that I was not able to get to ear- lier, just for your brief comment. You wrote in 2001 that neutrality and objectivity in the law are a myth. You said that you agreed that ‘‘there is no objective stance, but only a series of perspectives, no neutrality, no escape from choice in judging.’’ Would you explain what that means? Judge SOTOMAYOR. In every single case, and Senator Graham gave the example in his opening statement, there are two parties arguing different perspectives on what the law means. That’s what litigation is about. And what the judge has to do is choose the perspective that’s going to apply to that outcome. So there is a choice. You’re going to rule in someone’s favor. You’re going to rule against someone’s favor. That’s the perspective of the lack of neutrality. It’s that you can’t just throw up your hands and say I’m not going to rule. Judges have to choose the answer to the question presented to the court. And so that’s what that part of my talking was about, that there is choice in judging. You have to rule. Senator CORNYN. You characterized, in your opening statement, that your judicial philosophy is one of fidelity to the law. Would you agree that both the majority and the dissenting justices in last year’s landmark gun rights case, the D.C. v. Heller case, were each doing their best to be faithful to the text and the history of the Sec- ond Amendment? In other words, do you believe that they were exhibiting fidelity to the law? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I think both were looking at the legal issue before them, looking at the text of the Second Amendment, looking at its history, looking at the court’s precedent over time and trying to answer the question that was before them. Senator CORNYN. Do you think it is fair to characterize the five justices who affirmed the right to keep and bear arms as engaged in right-wing judicial activism? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t use that word for judging. I eschew la- bels of any kind. That’s why I don’t like analogies and why I prefer, in brief-writing, to talk about judges interpreting the law. Senator CORNYN. What about the 10 Democratic Senators, in- cluding Senator Feingold, who has been mentioned earlier, who joined the brief, the amicus brief to the U.S. Supreme Court urging the court to recognize the individual right to keep and bear arms? Do you think, by encouraging an individual right to keep and bear arms, that somehow these Senators were encouraging the court to engage in right-wing judicial activism? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t describe people’s actions with those la- bels. Senator CORNYN. I appreciate that. You testified earlier today that you would not use foreign law in interpreting the Constitution VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00475 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 464 and statutes. I would like to contrast that statement with an ear- lier statement that you made back in April, and I quote, ‘‘Inter- national law and foreign law will be very important in the discus- sion of how to think about unsettled issues in our legal system. It is my hope that judges everywhere will continue to do this.’’ Let me repeat the words that you used 3 months ago. You said ‘‘very important’’ and you said ‘‘judges everywhere.’’ This suggests to me that you consider the use of foreign law to be broader than you indicated in your testimony earlier today. Do you stand by the testimony you gave earlier today, do you stand by the speech you gave 3 months ago, or can you reconcile those for us? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Stand by both, because the speech made very clear, in any number of places, where I said you can’t use it to in- terpret the Constitution or American law. I went through—not a lengthy, because it was a shorter speech, but I described the situa- tions in which American law looks to foreign law by its terms, meaning it’s counseled by American law. My part of the speech said people misunderstand what the word ‘‘use’’ means and I noted that ‘‘use’’ appears to people to mean if you cite a foreign decision, that means it’s controlling an outcome or that you are using it to control an outcome, and I said no. You think about foreign law as a—and I believe my words said this. You think about foreign law the way judges think about all sources of information, ideas, and you think about them as ideas both from law review articles and from state court decisions and from all the sources, including Wikipedia, that people think about ideas. Okay. They don’t control the outcome of the case. The law compels that outcome and you have to follow the law. But judges think. We en- gage in academic discussions. We talk about ideas. Sometimes you will see judges who choose—I haven’t, it’s not my style, but there are judges who will drop a footnote and talk about an idea. I’m not thinking that they’re using that idea to compel a result. It’s an engagement of thought. But the outcome—you could always find an exception, I assume, if I looked hard enough, but in my review, judges are applying American law. Senator CORNYN. Your Honor, why would a judge cite foreign law unless it somehow had an impact on their decision or their deci- sion-making process? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I don’t know why other judges do it. As I ex- plained, I haven’t. But I look at the structure of what the judge has done and explains and go by what that judge tells me. There are situations—that’s as far as I can go. Senator CORNYN. You said, at another occasion, that you find for- eign law useful because it ‘‘gets the creative juices flowing.’’ What does that mean? Judge SOTOMAYOR. To me, I am a part academic. Please don’t forget that I taught at two law schools. I do speak more than I should and I think about ideas all the time. And so for me, it’s fun to think about ideas. You sit in a lunchroom among judges and you’ll often hear them say, ‘‘Did you see what that law school professor said’’ or ‘‘did you VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00476 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 465 see what some other judge wrote and what do you think about it,’’ but it’s just talking. It’s sharing ideas. What you’re doing in each case, and that’s what my speech said, is you can’t use foreign law to determine the American Constitu- tion. It can’t be used either as a holding or precedent. Senator CORNYN. Do you agree with me that if the American peo- ple want to change the Constitution, that is a right reserved to them under the Constitution to amend it and change it rather than to have judges, under the guise of interpreting the law, in effect, change the Constitution by judicial fiat? Judge SOTOMAYOR. In that regard, the Constitution is abun- dantly clear. There is an amendment process set forth. It controls how you change the Constitution. Senator CORNYN. I would just say if academics or legislators or anybody else who has got creative juices flowing from the invoca- tion of foreign law, if they want to change the Constitution, my contention is the most appropriate way to do that is for the Amer- ican people to do it through the amendment process rather than for judges to do it by relying on foreign law. Judge SOTOMAYOR. We have no disagreement. Senator CORNYN. Thank you very much, Your Honor. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Coburn. Senator COBURN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to go into an area that we have not covered, no one has covered yet. I am reminded of Senator Sessions talking to you about pay. I would predict to you, in about 15 or 18 years, judicial pay, we will not be able to pay your salary. Nine years from now, we are going to have $1 trillion worth of interest on the national debt. It is not very funny. What it does is it undermines the freedom and security of our children and our grandchildren. I want to go to Madison. Madison is the father of our Constitution. I want to get your take on three issues; one, the commerce clause; two, the general welfare clause; and, No. 3, the 10th Amendment. I don’t know if you have read the Federalist Papers, but I find them very interesting to give insight into what our founders meant, what they said when they wrote our Constitution. In Federalist 51, Madison expressed the importance of a re- strained government by stating, ‘‘In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this, you must first enable the government to control the governed, and, in the next place, oblige to control itself.’’ Do you believe that our Federal courts enable the Federal Gov- ernment to exceed its intended boundaries by interpreting Article I’s commerce clause and necessary and proper clause to delegate virtual unlimited authority to the Federal Government? Judge SOTOMAYOR. The Supreme Court, in these two rulings or one, has said there are limits to all powers set forth in the Con- stitution and the question for the court in any particular situation is to determine whether whatever branch of government or state is acting within the limits of the Constitution. Senator COBURN. Let me read you another Madison quote, again, the father of our Constitution. ‘‘If Congress can employ money in- definitely to the general welfare and are the sole and supreme VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00477 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 466 judges of general welfare, they may take the care of religion into their own hands; they may appoint teachers in every state, county and parish and pay them out of the public treasury; they may take into their own hands the education of our children, establishing in like manner schools throughout the union; they may assume the provision for the poor; they may undertake the regulation of all roads other than post roads.’’ ‘‘In short, everything from the highest object of state legislation down to the most minute object of police would be thrown under the power of Congress. Were the power of Congress to be estab- lished and the latitude contended for, it would subvert the very foundations and transmute the very nature of the limited govern- ment established by this Constitution and the American people.’’ I guess my question to you is do you have any concerns, as we now have a $3.6 trillion budget, $11.4 trillion worth of debt, $90 trillion worth of unfunded obligations that are going to be placed on the backs of our children, that maybe some reining in of Con- gress in terms of the general welfare clause, the commerce clause, and reinforcement of the 10th Amendment under its intended pur- poses by our founders, which said that everything that was not spe- cifically listed in the enumerated powers was left to the states and the people, do you have any concerns about where we are heading in this nation and the obligations of the Supreme Court maybe to relook at what Madison and our founders intended as they wrote these clauses into our Constitution? Judge SOTOMAYOR. One of the beauties of our Constitution is the very question that you ask me, is the dialog that’s left in the first instance to this body and to the House of Representatives. The answer to that question is not mine in the abstract. The an- swer to that question is a discussion that this legislative body will come to an answer about as reflected in laws it will pass. And once it passes those laws, there may be individuals who have rights to challenge those laws and will come to us and ask us to examine what the Constitution says about what Congress did. But it is the great beauty of this nation that we do leave the law- making to our elected branches and that we expect our courts to understand its limited role, but important role in ensuring that the Constitution is upheld in every situation that’s presented to it. Senator COBURN. I believe our founders thought that the Su- preme Court would be the check and balance on the commerce clause, the general welfare clause, and the insurance of the 10th Amendment, and that is the reason I raised those issues with you. I wonder if you think we have honored the plain language of the Constitution and the intent of the founders with regard to the lim- ited power granted to the Federal Government. Judge SOTOMAYOR. That’s almost a judgment call. I don’t know how to answer your question, because it would seem like it would lead to the natural question, did the courts do this in this case, and that would be opining on a particular view of the case. And that case would have a holding and I would have to look at that holding in the context of another case. I’m attempting to answer your question, Senator, but our roles and the ones we choose to serve, your job is wonderful. It is so, so VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00478 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 467 important. But I love that you’re doing your job and I love that I’m doing my job as a judge. I like mine better. Senator COBURN. I think I would like yours better, as well, al- though I doubt that I could ever get to the stage of a confirmation process. Well, let me just end up with this. People call me simple because I really believe this document is the genesis of our success as a country and I believe these words are plainly written and I believe we ignore them at our peril. My hope is that the Supreme Court will relook at the intent of our founders and the 10th Amendment, where they guaranteed that everything that wasn’t spelled out specifically for the Congress to do was explicitly reserved to the states and to the people. To do less than that undermines our future and all we have to do is take a little snapshot of where we are today economically, fi- nancially and leadership-wise, to understand we ignored their plain words and we find ourselves near bankruptcy because of it. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. It is almost over. There is one question that I withheld the balance of my time before and I want to make sure I ask this question, because I asked it of Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito when they were before this Committee. As you know, in death penalty cases, it takes five justices to stay an execution, but only four to grant certiorari to hear a case. You could grant certiorari to hear a case, but if the execution is not stayed, it could become a moot point. The person can be executed in between. So usually if there are four justices willing to hear a case, some- body agrees to the fifth vote to stay an execution just as a matter of courtesy, so the cert does not become moot. So the person is not executed in the few weeks that might be in between granting of cert and the hearing of the case. Now, both Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito agreed that this rule was sensible, the rule of five or the courtesy fifth. It ap- pears, according to a study done by the New York Times, that very reasonable rule and the rule that both Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito said was very reasonable, and I think the majority of us on the Committee thought it was reasonable, they suggest that that rule has not been adhered to, the rule of four, because there have been a number of cases where four justices voted for cert and wanted to stay the execution, but the fifth would not and the per- son was executed before the case was heard. If you were on the Supreme Court, and this is basically the same thing I asked Justice Roberts and Justice Alito, if you were on the Supreme Court, four of your fellow justices said they would like to consider a death penalty case and they asked you to be a fifth vote to stay the execution, even though you did not necessarily plan to vote for cert, how would you approach that issue? Judge SOTOMAYOR. I answer the way that those two justices did, which is I would consider the rule of the fifth vote in the way it has been practiced by the court. It has a sensible basis, which is that if you don’t grant the stay, an execution can happen before you reach the question of whether to grant certiorari or not. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00479 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 468 Chairman LEAHY. Well, I thank you. I have applauded both Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito for their answers. It appears that perhaps somewhere between the hearing room and the Supreme Court, their minds changed. Now, in 2007, Christopher Scott Emmett was executed even though four justices had voted for a stay of execution. Justice Ste- vens wrote a statement, joined by Justice Ginsberg, calling for a routine practice of staying executions scheduled in advance of our review of the denial of a capital defendant’s first application—first application—for a Federal writ of habeas corpus. I am not asking for a commitment on what Justices Stevens and Ginsberg said, but is that something that ought to at least be con- sidered? Judge SOTOMAYOR. Unquestionably. As I said, there is an under- lying reason for that practice. Chairman LEAHY. And there is an understanding that when the case is reviewed, the sentence may well be upheld and the execu- tion will go forward. But this is on the various steps for that hear- ing. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Yes, sir. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Just briefly, I thank you again for your testi- mony. I know judges come before these committees and they make promises and they mean those things and then, if they are lucky, they get a lifetime appointment and I think, most likely, their judi- cial philosophy will take over as the years go by, 10, 20, 30 years on the bench. So this is an important decision for us to reach and to consider and we will all do our best. I hope you felt that it has been a fairly conducted hearing. That has been my goal. Judge SOTOMAYOR. Thank you, Senators, to all Senators. I have received all the graciousness and fair hearing that I could have asked for and I thank you, Senator, for your participation in this process and in ensuring that. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. You are very courteous. I think, for the record, a number of significant articles should be in the record. Chairman LEAHY. Without objection. Senator SESSIONS. One from the Washington Post on July 9, ‘‘Uncommon Detail.’’ Wall Street Journal, ‘‘Defining Activism Down,’’ July 15. New York Times, ‘‘New Scrutiny on Judge’s Most Controversial Case’’ by Adam Liptak. New York Times, ‘‘Nominee Rulings are Exhaustive, But Often Narrow.’’ The Ninth Justice, ‘‘How Ricci Almost Disappeared.’’ The Ninth Justice, ‘‘Justices Re- ject Sotomayor Position 9–0.’’ And the Wall Street Journal, ‘‘The Wise Latina’’ article of June 15, which is an important analysis. [The articles appear as a submission for the record.] Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Chairman, for the record, I would also offer a letter from Sandra Froman, former president of National Rifle Association, and a series of other people who cosigned that letter, making this point. I think it is important, Sandra Froman, herself a lawyer. ‘‘Surprisingly, Heller was a 5:4 decision, with some justices argu- ing that the Second Amendment does not apply to private citizens VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00480 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 469 or, if it does, even a total gun ban could be upheld if a legitimate government interest could be found. The dissenting justices also found D.C.’s absolute ban on handguns within the home to be a reasonable restriction. If this had been the majority view, then any gun ban could be upheld and the Second Amendment would be meaningless.’’ It goes on to say, ‘‘The Second Amendment survives today by a single vote in the Supreme Court. Both its application to the states and whether there will be a meaningful strict standard of review remain to be decided. Justice Sotomayor has revealed her views on these issues and we believe they are contrary to the intent and purposes of the Second Amendment and the Bill of Rights. As the Second Amendment leaders, we are deeply concerned about pre- serving all fundamental rights for current and future generations. We strongly oppose this nominee.’’ I offer that and a letter from the Americans United for Life, a 60-plus association, North Carolina Property Association. [The information appear in the index.] Chairman LEAHY. We will hold the record open until 5 tonight for any other material people wish to submit to the record. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for your courtesy throughout. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. We will also hold the record open until 5 tomorrow for additional questions that Senators wish to ask. Now, Judge Sotomayor, this hearing has extended over 4 days. On the first day, you listened to our opening statements rather ex- tensively. You shared with us a very concise statement about your own fidelity to the law and I suspect it will be in law school texts in years to come. Over the last 3 days, you have answered our questions from Sen- ators on both sides of the aisle. I hope I speak for all the Senators, both Republican and Democratic, on this Committee when I thank you for answering with such intelligence, grace and patience. I also thank the members of your family for sitting here, also, with such intelligence, grace, and especially patience. During the course of this week, almost 2,000 people have at- tended this hearing in person, 2,000. Millions more have seen it, heard it or read about it thanks to newspapers and blogs, tele- vision, cable, Webcasting. I think through these proceedings, the American people have gotten to know you. Even though I sat on two different confirmation hearings for you over the past 17 years, I feel I have gotten to know you even better. The President told the American people in his Internet address back in May, as a justice of the Supreme Court, you would ‘‘bring knowledge and experience acquired over the course of a brilliant legal career, with the wisdom accumulated over the course of an extraordinary journey, a journey defined by hard work, fierce intel- ligence, and enduring faith in America, all things are possible.’’ We bore witness to that this week. Experience and wisdom will benefit all Americans. When you walk under that piece of Vermont marble over the door of the Supreme Court, speaking of equal jus- tice under law, I know that will guide you. Judge Sotomayor, thank you, Godspeed. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00481 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 470 Judge SOTOMAYOR. Thank you all. Chairman LEAHY. We stand in recess for 10 minutes. [Whereupon, the Committee was recessed at 1:24 p.m.] AFTER RECESS [1:42 p.m.] Senator WHITEHOUSE. Good afternoon, everyone. The Ranking Member has joined us, and the hearing will now come to order. We have a considerable number of witnesses to get through today, so I would ask Ms. Askew and Ms. Boies and the witnesses who will follow them to please be scrupulous about keeping your oral statements to 5 minutes or under. Your full written statement will be put in the record, and Senators will each have 5 minutes to ask questions of each panel. Along with Ranking Member Ses- sions, I am very glad to welcome ABA witnesses Kim Askew and Mary Boies. Kim Askew is the Chair of the ABA Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary, and Mary Boies is the ABA Standing Commit- tee’s lead evaluator on its investigation into Judge Sotomayor’s qualifications to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States. The Ranking Member and I both look forward to their testimony, and if I could ask them please to stand and be sworn, we will begin. Do you affirm that the testimony you are about to give before the Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Ms. ASKEW. I do. Ms. BOIES. I do. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Please be seated. You may proceed with your statements. STATEMENT OF KIM J. ASKEW, ESQ., CHAIR, STANDING COM- MITTEE ON THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY, AMERICAN BAR AS- SOCIATION, ACCOMPANIED BY MARY M. BOIES, MEMBER, STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE FEDERAL JUDICIARY, AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION Ms. ASKEW. Thank you. Good afternoon and thank you for hav- ing us. I am Kim Askew of Dallas, Texas, Chair of the Standing Committee on the Federal Judiciary. This is Mary Boies. Mary Boies is our Second Circuit representative, and as you mentioned, she was the lead evaluator on the investigation of Judge Sonia Sotomayor. We are honored to appear here today to explain the Standing Committee’s evaluation of this nominee. The Standing gave her its highest rating and unanimously found that she was ‘‘Well Qualified.’’ For 60 years, the Standing Committee has conducted a thorough, non-partisan peer review in which we do not consider the ideology of the nominee, and we have done that with every Federal judicial nominee. We evaluate the integrity, the professional competence, and the judicial temperament of the nominee. The Standing Com- mittee does not propose, endorse, or recommend nominees. Our sole function is to evaluate the professional qualifications of a nominee and then rate the nominee either ‘‘Well Qualified,’’ ‘‘Qualified,’’ or ‘‘Not Qualified.’’ VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00482 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 471 A nominee to the Supreme Court of the United States must pos- sess exceptional professional qualifications—that is, a high degree of scholarship, academic talent, analytical and writing ability, and overall excellence. And because of that, our investigations of Su- preme Court nominees is more extensive than the nominations to the lower Federal courts and are procedurally different in two ways. First, all circuit members participate in the evaluations. An in- vestigation is conducted in every circuit, not just the circuit in which the nominee resides. Second, in addition to the Standing Committee reading the writings of the nominee, we commission three reading groups of distinguished scholars and practitioners who also review the nomi- nee’s legal writings and advise the Standing Committee. George- town University Law Center and Syracuse University School of Law formed reading groups this year, and these groups were com- prised of professors who are all recognized experts in their sub- stantive areas of law. Our practitioners reading group was also formed, and that group was also comprised of nationally recognized lawyers with substantial trial and appellate practices. All of them are familiar with Supreme Court practices, and many have clerked for Justices on the U.S. Supreme Court. In connection with Judge Sotomayor’s evaluation, we initially contacted some 2,600 persons who were likely to have relevant knowledge of her professional qualifications. This included every United States Federal judge, State judges, lawyers, law professors and deans, and, of course, members of the community and bar rep- resentatives. We received 850 responses to our contacts, and we personally interviewed or received detailed letters or emails from over 500 judges, lawyers, and others in the community who knew Judge Sotomayor or who had appeared before her. We also ana- lyzed transcripts, speeches, other materials, and, of course, Ms. Boies and I interviewed her, and it is on that basis that we reached the unanimous conclusion as a Standing Committee that she was well qualified. Her record is known to this distinguished Committee. She has been successful as a prosecutor, a lawyer in private practice, a judge, a legal lecturer. She has served with distinction for almost 17 years on the Federal bench, both as a trial court judge and an appellate judge. She has taught in two of the Nation’s leading law schools, and her work in the community is well known. She has a reputation for integrity and outstanding character. She is universally praised for her diligence and industry. She has an outstanding intellect, strong analytical abilities, sound judgment, an exceptional work ethic, and is known for her courtroom prepara- tion. Her judicial temperament meets the high standards for ap- pointment to the Court. The Standing Committee fully addressed the concerns raised re- garding her writings and some aspects of her judicial temperament. Those are set forth in detail in our correspondence to this Com- mittee, and we ask that they be made a part of the record. [The information appear as a submission for the record.] Ms. ASKEW. In determining that these concerns did not detract from the highest rating of ‘‘Well Qualified’’ for the judge, the Stand- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00483 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 472 ing Committee was persuaded by the overwhelming responses of lawyers and judges who praised her writings and overall tempera- ment. On behalf of the Standing Committee, Ms. Boies and I thank you for the opportunity to be present today and present these remarks, and we are certainly available to answer any questions you may have. [The prepared statement of Ms. Askew appear as a submission for the record:] Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you so much. Ms. Boies, do you have a separate statement you wish to make? Ms. BOIES. I do not, Senator. We are happy to answer your ques- tions. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Very good. I appreciate it. I just want to summarize a few conclusions from the report and then ask you a little bit about the scope of the effort that went into it in terms of the numbers of people who were interviewed and the duration and nonpartisan nature of the effort, if you would. On page 6, you conclude that Judge Sotomayor ‘‘has earned and enjoys an excellent reputation for integrity and outstanding char- acter. Lawyers and judges uniformly praised the nominee’s integ- rity.’’ On page 11, you report that Judge Sotomayor’s opinions show ‘‘an adherence to precedent and an absence of attempts to set pol- icy based on the judge’s personal views. Her opinions are narrow in scope, address only the issues presented, do not revisit settled areas of law, and are devoid of broad or sweeping pronounce- ments.’’ On page 13, you report that ‘‘the overwhelming weight of opinion shared by judges, lawyers, courtroom observers, and former law clerks is that Judge Sotomayor’s style on the bench is: A, consistent with the active questioning style that is well known on the Second Circuit’’—and which, as a personal aside, I will say I liked as a practitioner; ‘‘B, directed at the weak points in the arguments of parties to the case even though it may not always seem that way to the lawyer then being questioned; C, designed to ferret out rel- ative strengths and shortcomings of the arguments presented; and, D, within the appropriate bounds of judging.’’ And, finally, the Committee unanimously found an absence of any bias in the nominee’s extensive work. Lawyers and judges overwhelmingly agree—this is your quote—that ‘‘she is an abso- lutely fair judge. None, including those many lawyers who lost cases before her, reported to the Standing Committee that they have ever discerned any racial, gender, cultural, or other bias in her opinions, or in any aspect of her judicial performance. Lawyers and judges commented that she is open-minded, thoroughly exam- ines a record in far more detail than many circuit judges, and lis- tens to all sides of the argument.’’ Could you tell us a little bit about the scope of the review that took place that enabled you to reach those firm conclusions? Ms. BOIES. Unlike with most Federal judicial nominees, in the case of a Supreme Court nominee, the entire 15-member Com- mittee writes letters to the entire judiciary throughout the country and also to lawyers throughout the country. We go through her VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00484 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 473 opinions, and we look to see what lawyers appeared in front of her, and we write many letters to those people. In addition, we write to, as Chair Askew said, to law school deans and law professors. And as she mentioned, we commissioned three reading groups of professors and practitioners. There were 25 law professors from Syracuse Law School and from Georgetown Law Center who read her opinions, as did 11 practitioners, many of whom themselves were former Supreme Court law clerks. And the standards that we look at and the only standards are the professional competence, ju- dicial temperament, and integrity. And each circuit member interviews all the judges and lawyers who respond to our letters or whom they identify as someone who knows or has worked with Judge Sotomayor. Those interviews are then collected. I review them. The Chair and I had a personal interview with Judge Sotomayor in her chambers in New York. We met for over 3 hours, and we discussed with her in detail every criticism that we had heard of her judging and the factors that we look at. And following that, we received the reading group reports which were, each one, hundreds and hundreds of pages that went through her opinions one by one. They didn’t merely give an overall sum- mary. We read those. In addition, I read every opinion that she wrote on the Second Circuit and many that she wrote on the dis- trict court. In addition, we took many of her—we, the Standing Committee, took many of her opinions, and we divided them among themselves so that we, too, read those opinions, not merely the reading groups. And I think that is a snapshot of the scope of our review, but I will give you one example, if I may, of how we operate, and that is, we received a critical review from a lawyer about her conduct at a par- ticular oral argument. We identified the date of that argument and the case. We then went through the court records and the opinions that were written, and we identified all of the lawyers who were involved in that case. We identified the docket sheet from the Sec- ond Circuit for that date so that we could identify any other law- yers who might have been present in the courtroom even though they were not there for that particular case. And we identified all of the lawyers who had any argument that day, because maybe they would have a view of the panel. And then, finally, we talked to the other members of the panel to ask what their view was on her judicial temperament because we had received a fairly impor- tant criticism. And so we not only reviewed that criticism, but we looked to see how others viewed the same conduct. Now, you may say that this is stacking the deck against her, be- cause we know we have a critical comment, and maybe she was having a very bad day, and maybe she wasn’t up to her—the way she normally would be on the bench. But we talked to at least ten other lawyers and another member of the panel. Ms. ASKEW. And that is what the peer review process is. Much of what you will read anecdotally, if you talk to, you know, the legal press, you may not have personal knowledge necessarily of what the judge does, or you may not have been the lawyer who ac- tually participated in that argument. The reason we talk to lawyers is because we examine whether you have personal knowledge of VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00485 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 474 what you are telling us. We will ask you about the case that you were in because then we can go forward and investigate. So we talked to all the lawyers. We talked to the judges. In some instances, we even had the pleasure of listening to the transcript because one of the allegations here was a lack of temperament. That cannot always be picked up from the written record. Luckily, we were able to find out there so we could hear the tone and the tenor of the ‘‘hot courtroom’’ that has been described before this Committee. And so when we come to this distinguished Committee and say that this was in keeping with the practice of the Second Circuit, we have looked at it in every way that we possibly can to ensure what took place. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Well, let me conclude by thanking you for the thoroughness of your evaluation, and as I understand it, the ul- timate conclusion was to evaluate her as ‘‘Well Qualified,’’ which is the highest available ranking, which was unanimous, and you con- sidered her conduct as a judge over 17 years to be, and I quote, ‘‘exemplary.’’ Ms. BOIES. That is correct. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you very much. The Ranking Member, Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. New Chairman. It is good to be with you. Senator WHITEHOUSE. And you, sir. Senator SESSIONS. The American Bar Association was critical of former President Bush—well, former former President Bush—for not asking for evaluations before the nomination was made. Presi- dent Obama followed that same process. Since that time, have you changed your view about the viability or the advisability of con- ducting the—asking the President to give the names—a name or names before a final decision is made? Ms. ASKEW. As Chair of the Committee, let me answer that. The Committee does not take a stand on that. The ABA may take a stand on whether it thinks it is a better idea for a President to nominate or to pre- or post-nomination basis, but the Standing Committee is divorced of the policy side of the ABA. It is our posi- tion, and always has been, that we will conduct a neutral, non- partisan peer review whenever the President gives us that informa- tion. Senator SESSIONS. With regard to the temperament question, there were some questions you asked about that, and I guess the Almanac or whatever that Judge Sotomayor turned out, they have quite a—much more negative feedback from the lawyers: ‘‘a terror on the bench,’’ ‘‘a bit of a bully,’’ a lot of statements like that. And yet you still gave her the highest rating. So you talked to those people, and you are Okay with that? Ms. ASKEW. We absolutely are. And just to give you a sense, we talked to over 500 lawyers, and not to minimize any comment, be- cause sometimes one criticism can be the most important comment that we get on a nominee. But of the 500 lawyers that we spoke to, we received comments on the temperament issue from less than 10 lawyers. They were mostly lawyers and judges who were outside VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00486 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 475 of the Second Circuit and were not as familiar with Second Circuit precedent. Senator SESSIONS. Well, you know, I hope the Second Circuit doesn’t approve of beating up lawyers too much. Ms. ASKEW. Well, they do not—— Senator SESSIONS. But, anyway—— Senator WHITEHOUSE. Just enough. Senator SESSIONS. Let me ask you, did you—I was troubled by the handling of the Ricci case. That was a summary order at first until other judges on the panel objected, and then was a per cu- riam opinion. But I think the process of making that a summary opinion was—to me, pretty much takes you back. How did you con- clude—did you look at that precisely? Ms. BOIES. We did look at that case, Senator. We do not take a position on whether an opinion is right or is wrong. That is not what our function is. However, we did look at the procedure that was followed in the Ricci case, and that is a case in which the Sec- ond Circuit panel heard full briefing and oral argument, and fol- lowing which the panel—which was not presided over by Judge Sotomayor, but the panel decided to adopt, in effect, the district court ruling because they affirmed the ruling and they agreed with its reasoning, and they did not—— Senator SESSIONS. Well, that is basically true. However, one judge was quite reluctant, another one moderated, and the judge apparently wanted to do it this way and prevailed. But the only thing I was asking about—and if you are prepared to make an ex- pression of opinion—is the decision to decide it as a summary mat- ter, not even a per curiam opinion. Did you deal with that issue and specifics? Ms. ASKEW. We are aware of how the Second Circuit handles summary opinions. We did not talk to her about that. We did not believe that was within the criteria that we evaluate with judges. We did read the opinion in great detail. Members of the reading groups, all three reading groups—indeed, we were very lucky to re- ceive the Supreme Court opinion on this before our report was fi- nalized, so we got a complete briefing on that case. And we—— Senator SESSIONS. One more thing. A recent group of political scientists did a study of the ABA nomination process from 1985 to 2008 and found that the ABA must take affirmative steps to change its system for rating nominees to avoid favor and—bias in favor of liberal nominees. Do you take that seriously? Are you will- ing to look at how you handle these things? Ms. ASKEW. We take any critique of our process seriously. I can tell you that we judge every nominee based on the record that is presented to us and the background and experience of the nominee. Senator SESSIONS. Well, let me just say this: I think it is a valu- able contribution to the process. Ms. ASKEW. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. When you talk to lawyers and sometimes— most people are very—tend very much to be supportive of any nominee, especially if—you know, they just tend to be supportive and minimize problems. But sometimes I think you could pick up things that other people wouldn’t that could be valuable to this process, and I thank you. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00487 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 476 Ms. ASKEW. Thank you. Ms. BOIES. Senator, if I may, I would like just to go back briefly to the Ricci decision. One thing that I did look at is that in cal- endar year 2008, the Second Circuit issued 1,482 opinions, not counting the non-argued asylum cases. And of those 1,482, 1,081 were decided by summary order. Only 401 full opinions were issued. And as I read the record, one of the reasons the panel believed it could proceed by summary order is because it believed that there was controlling Second Circuit precedent which a panel is not in a position to change. So I don’t mean to open the issue, but I would like to put it into some context as to how the Second Circuit normally operates. Senator SESSIONS. Well, that is a nice way to say it. But this was a—the rule said if it has jurisprudential importance, you should have an opinion. I think it was in violation of the rule. I don’t know why they did it, but it was in violation of the rule, in my judgment as a practicing lawyer. I would have thought you would have agreed, Ms. Boies. Senator WHITEHOUSE. We will hear next from the distinguished Senator from Pennsylvania, Senator Specter. Senator SPECTER. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. No questions, just a comment to thank you for your service. There have been oc- casions when the American Bar Association was not consulted, and I think that the ABA has a special status. The Judiciary Com- mittee is hearing from all interested parties. It is not possible to invite all interested parties to appear in person, but we welcome comments from anyone in a free society to tell us what they think of the nominee. But the ABA performs this function regularly with all Federal judges, and you interview a lot of people who are knowledgeable and have had contact, and I think it is very, very useful. So thank you for your service. I have no questions, Mr. Chairman, on the substance. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Then we will turn to Senator Cardin of Maryland. Senator CARDIN. I also do not have any questions, but I do want to make an observation, because I very much respect the opinions of the American Bar Association and fellow lawyers. I think it is the highest compliment when your peers give you the highest rating. They are your toughest critics. I know that law- yers who are selecting a jury will almost always strike lawyers from that jury list because they are the toughest audience that you have. So this, I think, speaks to the nominee. And as I understand it, the manner in which you go about rating a judge is not only her experience but also the way that she has gone about reaching her decisions from the point of view of the ap- propriate role of a judge, her judicial temperament, and the ab- sence of bias in rendering those decisions. And they are exactly what we are looking for from the next Justice on the Supreme Court. So I just really want to thank you for giving us this information and participating in the process. Ms. ASKEW. Thank you, Senator. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00488 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 477 Senator WHITEHOUSE. Senator Cornyn. Senator CORNYN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to wel- come our two witnesses, and thank you for your assistance to the Committee, and particularly to say how good it is to see Kim Askew, my constituent from Dallas, Texas. She does great work as Chair of the Committee, and welcome. Thank you for your assist- ance to the Committee in performing its constitutional function. Ms. ASKEW. Thank you. Senator WHITEHOUSE. There being no further questions, the panel is excused with our gratitude for a commendable and very diligent effort. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you very much. Senator WHITEHOUSE. We will take a 5-minute recess while the next panel assembles. [Whereupon, at 2:08 p.m., the Committee was recessed.] After Recess [2:12 p.m.] Senator WHITEHOUSE. The hearing of the Judiciary Committee will come back to order. We are awaiting the arrival of Mayor Bloomberg and District At- torney Morgenthau, who are coming down from New York. I’m told that they are 5 minutes away, but the 5 minutes that people are away can be a longer 5 minutes than a regular 5 minutes. So in the interest of the time of the proceeding and of the other wit- nesses, we will proceed and come to them when they arrive and have a chance to take their seats. Senator SESSIONS. Well, in the Mayor’s defense, he probably thought we would be operating under Senate time and we would certainly be late and he could have a little extra time. Senator WHITEHOUSE. That is our custom. Senator SESSIONS. But we’re moving along well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Our first witness then will be Dustin McDaniel. He is the Attorney General for the State of Arkansas and the Southern Chair of the National Association of Attorneys General. Previous to his election as Attorney General, he worked in private practice in Jonesboro, Arkansas. Prior to taking office, Mr. McDaniel also served as a uniformed patrol officer in his home- town of Jonesboro, Arkansas. He is a graduate of the University of Arkansas Little Rock Law School. Attorney General McDaniel, will you please stand to be sworn? Do you affirm that the testimony you are about to give before the Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Mr. MCDANIEL. I do. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Please be seated. Attorney Morgenthau, please be seated. Attorney General McDaniel, please proceed with your statement. STATEMENT OF DUSTIN MCDANIEL, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF ARKANSAS Mr. MCDANIEL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Sessions. My name is Dustin McDaniel and I’m the Attorney Gen- eral of the State of Arkansas. I am here today to speak in support VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00489 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 478 of the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court of the United States. We’ve all heard all week about her compelling life story and im- pressive accomplishments. I have the highest respect and admira- tion for her and I’m proud to testify on behalf of this person who was first appointed by President George H.W. Bush, and then by my most famous predecessor in the Arkansas Attorney General’s Office, President Bill Clinton. More specifically, I’m here to rebut any assertion that her par- ticipation in the matter of Ricci v. DeStefano in any way reflects upon her qualifications or abilities to serve as a Justice on the United States Supreme Court. When the Supreme Court granted certiorari in the Ricci case, I, on behalf of the State of Arkansas, joined with five other attorneys general in support of the Second Circuit. Before I address the case and the brief, let me address the parties and their issues. I entered the world of public service long before I became an elected official. After college, I turned down my admission into law school and took a civil service exam in my hometown of Jonesboro, Arkansas. I became a police officer and I saw firsthand the heroism and dedication of the men and women who protect and serve our communities very day. Firefighters like Frank Ricci and his col- leagues run into homes and buildings when everyone else is run- ning out. I have the highest respect and gratitude for all who serve our communities, States, and Nation. They are heroes among us and they deserve to be treated fairly by our system. My personal experience with the civil service exam was a favor- able one, but not all are so lucky. I understand the frustration that the firefighters felt with this process. I also understand the city’s fear of litigation and unfair results. I am for a process that is fair. No one should be given an unfair advantage, but no one should be subject to an unfair disadvantage either. As Attorney General, I represent hundreds of State agencies, boards and commissions in matters of employment law. My job is to allow my clients to do their job without fear of unreasonable liti- gation. The law had, until recently, allowed for flexibility, nec- essary for public employers. The Supreme Court’s ruling in this case will likely increase costly litigation and the taxpayers will ulti- mately pay the bill. All who have commented on the nomination process in recent years have been critical of those who have been labeled an ‘‘activ- ist’’ judge. It’s important to note that the Second Circuit’s ruling in this case was not judicial activism at work; to the contrary, they followed existing law. In Ricci, the panel adopted the lengthy analysis of the District Court, which they called ‘‘thorough, thoughtful and well-reasoned’’. The District Court cited cases dating back some 28 years. The rul- ing was consistent with the law and the doctrine of stare decisis. Granted, the Supreme Court, in a closely divided opinion, ruled dif- ferently, but in doing so it set new precedent. It is also important to note that the Second Circuit’s ruling was supported by many prestigious groups, including the EEOC, the Department of Justice, the National League of Cities, the National Association of Counties, International Municipal Lawyers Associa- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00490 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 479 tion, and the Republican and Democratic Attorneys General of Alaska, Iowa, Arkansas, Maryland, Nevada, and Utah. There’s a large body of research available on Judge Sotomayor’s record. No allegation that she rules based on anything other than the law can stand when cast in the light of her actual record. The Con- gressional Research Service concluded, ‘‘Perhaps the most con- sistent characteristic of her approach as an appellate judge could be described as an adherence to the doctrine of stare decisis’’, that is, upholding past judicial precedents. One only has to look so far as to her own words. In Hayden v. Pataki, she wrote in a dissent, ‘‘It is the duty of a judge to follow the law, no question its plain terms.’’ She concluded by saying, ‘‘Congress would prefer to make any needed changes itself rather than have courts do so for it. In my opinion, Judge Sotomayor is abundantly qualified and is an excellent nominee. I believe that the people of the United States would be well served by her presence on the courts. It is my great honor and privilege to be here at this Committee, and I thank you ever so much for the opportunity to appear here today. Thank you. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you very much, Attorney General McDaniel. We will do a round of questions for the Attorney General and then once the—since the panel is completely assembled, I will have all the witnesses sworn and then we will proceed to Mayor Bloomberg, to District Attorney Morgenthau, and on across the panel, with one brief interruption to allow the distinguished Sen- ator from the State of New York, Senator Schumer, to introduce Mayor Bloomberg. Attorney General McDaniel, as a—as an experienced lawyer, is— let me ask you, is it not the case that it’s the Supreme Court’s task very frequently to resolve conflicts between the Circuit Court of Ap- peal? Mr. MCDANIEL. Yes, of course it is, Senator. Senator WHITEHOUSE. And if a Circuit Court is bound by its own prior precedent and therefore the doctrine of stare decisis controls a particular decision, that does not in any way inhibit the Supreme Court from reviewing that second decision against conflicting deci- sions from other circuits in its task in resolving those conflicts, cor- rect? Mr. MCDANIEL. That’s—that is correct. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Is it your sense that that is what occurred in this case, that the Second Circuit, in Ricci, felt itself bound by stare decisis as a result of its prior precedent, but that the Su- preme Court took the case to resolve issues of conflict with other circuits? Mr. MCDANIEL. Well, it certainly seems clear that the—the bind- ing law from the Supreme Court, which dated back up to 28 years, made it clear that remedial actions, although race-conscious, race- neutral, were permissible. I think that that is precisely what the case demonstrated and how the court ruled, and why the States that—that participated, Arkansas included, thought that it was im- portant to preserve for our clients the ability to try to avoid litiga- tion if they think they cannot defend an existing practice. If they VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00491 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 480 cannot defend it, no lawyer would tell their client, oh, go do it any- way. But clearly the Supreme Court thought that it was ripe for review, and they also thought that it was ripe to change the law, which is their purview, and that’s what they did. Senator WHITEHOUSE. That’s an interesting point. And many ob- servers, including prominent observers who have had their views expressed in the public media about this, have indicated that that decision changed the landscape of civil rights law. If a judge is a cautious and conservative jurist on a Circuit Court, do you believe it’s appropriate for the Circuit Court to change the landscape of civil rights law? Mr. MCDANIEL. Absolutely not. I don’t think that the Second Cir- cuit did anything short of what it had to do, which was to apply the existing law. The fact that the majority—a bare majority—in the United States Supreme Court decided to change existing law, frankly, that would have been inappropriate for the Second Circuit to take that responsibility on itself. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you, Attorney General. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. McDaniel. I was a 2-year At- torney General, and it was a great honor. With regard to the Ricci case, are you aware that the panel at- tempted to decide this case on a summary order, writing no opin- ion, not even a pro curium opinion? Mr. MCDANIEL. I am aware of that, sir. Senator SESSIONS. And are you aware that by chance one of the other members of the Circuit found out about that and an uproar of sorts occurred because the people—the other members—other members of the Circuit were very concerned about the opinion and thought it was an important opinion. Are you aware of that? Mr. MCDANIEL. I know that the—I know that the panel, or at least the body of judges, chose to review the matter and they voted not to meet en banc, and that there was—— Senator SESSIONS. That’s correct. Mr. MCDANIEL.—a pro curium that was issued. Senator SESSIONS. That’s correct. Now, by you—now, you say that there was Second Circuit opinion and authority to uphold this case. But—but on re-hearing, the slate is wiped clean and the panel can develop or formulate new authority or determine clearly whether or not that previous case may have applied. And are you aware that when they voted, the vote was 6:6 and Judge Sotomayor was the key vote in deciding not to re-hear the case? Therefore, we can conclude that not only did she decide this case, but it’s really not accurate to say she was just following authority since it was her vote that didn’t allow that authority to be reevaluated. Mr. MCDANIEL. Well, Senator, she was in the majority, so it’s fair to say that any one of those judges could be the deciding vote that—— Senator SESSIONS. That is correct. But it’s not fair, I think, to say that she didn’t have an opportunity to reevaluate it. She was sim- ply applying a law that she was bound to follow when she could have—if she felt differently, she could have called—she could have allowed it to have been re-discussed. Mr. MCDANIEL. Well, I also think that there were Supreme Court cases, not just Second Circuit cases. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00492 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 481 Senator SESSIONS. Well, are you aware that the Supreme Court says there were not? Are you aware the Supreme Court, in their opinion, said there was no Supreme Court authority on this mat- ter? Mr. MCDANIEL. I have read their opinion and I tend to agree with the minority, that this was, in fact, squarely within the—— Senator SESSIONS. Okay. Now, you filed—which I give you credit for. I did some of these things when I was Attorney General. You— you joined with 32 other State attorneys general in submitting an amicus brief to the U.S. Supreme Court on the Heller case. You took the provision—the brief argues that ‘‘the right to keep and bear arms is among the most fundamental of rights because it is essential to securing all other liberties’’. I see the Mayor not hap- pily listening to that. [Laughter.] Senator SESSIONS. You—but—so you believe that the Second Amendment is a fundamental right. Are you aware that Sandy Froman, the former president of NRA—you’re probably not familiar with this letter. But she’s a lawyer, and—and pointed out that Heller was just a 5:4 opinion, with some Justices arguing that the Second Amendment does not apply to private citizens, or that if it does, even a total gun ban would be upheld if a legitimate govern- ment interest could be found. The dissenting Justices also found that DC’s absolute gun ban on handguns within the home a reason- able restriction. That wouldn’t play too well in Alabama, and prob- ably not Arkansas, Oklahoma, or Texas. But most places. So I guess I’m saying, are you concerned that—and are you aware, of course, of the Maloney case in which Judge Sotomayor— and I think she can contend there was authority in that case that justified her concluding the Second Amendment does not apply to the States, but I was disappointed in the breadth, and the way she wrote it gave me concern. So are you aware that one vote on the Supreme Court can make the difference on the question of whether or not the right to keep and bear arms is protected against mayors or legislatures of States who disagree? Mr. MCDANIEL. Well, I was proud to join Arkansas into the brief on Heller v. District of Columbia. I intend to join again in the NRA v. Chicago in the attempt to have the Supreme Court review and take up the question, which I believe is ripe, as to whether or not the Second Amendment is applied to the States as incorporated by the Fourteenth Amendment. I do believe that the Second Amend- ment is a fundamental right, and I do believe that it is an indi- vidual right, not one tied to participation in a militia. The Attorney General, the current Attorney General in Texas, Senator Cornyn’s successor, and I have spent some time on that issue, even recently. And I am not, nonetheless, concerned with Judge Sotomayor’s position. I am confident that her answers that she’s provided to this Committee and her record are consistent with one another, and I do not believe that the right to keep and bear arms is at risk with this nominee, or frankly I wouldn’t testify for her. Senator SESSIONS. Well, thank you. I think it is. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00493 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 482 Senator WHITEHOUSE. Now that the panel is assembled, I will swear the entire panel in. We will return to regular order. You can all give your opening statements, and then questioning will begin at the conclusion of those opening statements. Would you please stand to be sworn? You may sit. Do you affirm that the testimony you’re about to give before the Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Mayor BLOOMBERG. I do. Mr. MORGENTHAU. I do. Mr. HENDERSON. I do. Mr. RICCI. I do. Mr. VARGAS. I do. Mr. KIRSANOW. I do. Ms. CHAVEZ. I do. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Please be seated. I will recognize Senator Schumer for a moment to welcome his constituent and the mayor of New York City, Michael Bloomberg. Senator SCHUMER. Well, it’s my honor to welcome two very dis- tinguished constituents here. I want to thank every witness for coming, but particularly extend a welcome to two of New York’s greatest public servants, Mayor Bloomberg and District Attorney Morgenthau. As you know, this nomination is the source of enor- mous pride to all New Yorkers, and your support for Judge Sotomayor has been extremely helpful to this Committee, to the Senate as a whole, and to the Nation in understanding what kind of Justice she will be, and very much appreciate your being here. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. Welcome. Mayor Bloomberg is the mayor of New York City. He is currently serving in his third term as mayor. He founded Bloomberg, LP, a New York City company that now has employees in more than 100 cities. Mayor Bloomberg is a graduate of Johns Hopkins University located in Baltimore, Maryland and Harvard Business School. We look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL BLOOMBERG, MAYOR, CITY OF NEW YORK Mayor BLOOMBERG. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Ranking Member Sessions, thank you very much. Senator, Senator, Senator. Senator Sessions, I must say, as a former gun owner, a former member of the NRA, and also a staunch defender of the Second Amendment, we probably don’t disagree very much if we really had a chance to talk. In any case, I wanted to thank everyone for the opportunity to testify before you today. I’m Mike Bloomberg and I’m here not only as the mayor of New York City, the city where Judge Sonia Sotomayor has spent her entire career, but also as someone who has appointed or reappointed more than 140 judges to New York City’s criminal and family courts. So, I do appreciate the job before you. About 3 months ago when President Obama invited Governor Schwarzenegger, Ed Rendell, and me to the White House to discuss infrastructure policy, I did find an opportunity to tell him what VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00494 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 483 many of the best legal minds in New York were telling me: Judge Sonia Sotomayor would be a superb Supreme Court Justice. I strongly believe that she should be supported by Republicans, Democrats and independents, and I should know because I’ve been all three. [Laughter.] Mayor BLOOMBERG. Judge Sotomayor has all the key qualities that I look for when I appoint a judge. First, she is someone with a sharp and agile mind, as her distinguished record and her testi- mony, I think, made clear. And as a former prosecutor, commercial litigator, District Court judge and appellate judge, she certainly brings a wealth of unique experience. Second, she is an independent jurist who does not fit squarely into an ideological box. A review of her rulings by New York Uni- versity’s Brennan Center found that judges on the Second Circuit court who were appointed by Republicans agreed with her more than 90 percent of the time when overruling a lower court decision, and when ruling a governmental action unconstitutional. So this is clearly someone whose decisions have cut across party lines, which is something I think the Supreme Court could use more of. And third, whether you agree or disagree with her on particular cases, she has a record of sound reasoning. In interviewing judicial candidates, I like to ask questions that have no easy answers and then listen to how they develop their responses. I want to know that they are open-minded enough to change their views if they hear compelling evidence and to see if they can provide a strong rationale for their legal conclusions, even if I disagree with it. The fact is, you’re never going to agree with a judicial candidate on every issue. I’ve appointed plenty of judges whose answers I don’t agree with at all, and I should point out that includes times when Judge Sotomayor has ruled against New York City, as she has done in a number of cases. So I’m not here as someone who agrees with the outcome of her decisions 100 percent of the time, and I don’t think that that should be the standard. Now, I’m not a lawyer or a constitutional scholar, but I think the standard should be: does she apply the law based on rational legal reasoning and is she within the bounds of mainstream thinking on issues of basic civil rights? And on both questions, I think the an- swer is, unequivocally, yes. It’s impossible to know how she will rule on cases in the future, or even what those cases might be. Given that a Supreme Court judge is likely to serve for decades, focusing on the issues de jour rather than intellectual capacity, an- alytical ability, and just plain common sense would miss what this country clearly needs: someone who has the ability to provide us with the legal reasoning and guidance that will be necessary to navigate the uncharted waters of tomorrow’s great debates. And I’m very confident that Judge Sotomayor has that ability. Finally, as the mayor of her hometown I would just like to make two brief points. First, on the issue of diversity; The Supreme Court currently includes one member who grew up in Brooklyn and one who grew up in Queens, and so there’s no doubt that adding someone who comes from the Bronx would improve the diversity of this court. [Laughter.] VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00495 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 484 Mayor BLOOMBERG. And if you disagree with me, you haven’t been to Brooklyn, Queens, or the Bronx. [Laughter.] Mayor BLOOMBERG. But seriously, Sonia Sotomayor is the quin- tessential New York success story. She has beaten all the odds and rose to the top. If that’s not the American dream, I don’t know what is. However, I don’t believe she should be confirmed on the strength of her biography, but I do think that her life’s story tells you an awful lot about her character and ability. And second, I just want to add a caution against those who would suggest that Judge Sotomayor’s service to the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund is somehow a negative. That’s an organization that is well-respected for its civil rights work in New York City, and although I certainly have not always seen eye- to-eye on every issue with them, there’s no question that they have made countless contributions to our city, and Judge Sotomayor should be based solely on her record and not on the record of others in the group. So, thank you very much for the opportunity to testify, and I urge you to confirm Sonia Sotomayor as a Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Senator CARDIN. Mayor Bloomberg, thank you very much for your testimony. We’ll now hear from Robert Morgenthau. Mr. Morgenthau has been the District Attorney of New York County since 1975 and is the longest-serving incumbent of that position. During his nine terms in office, his staff has conducted about 3.5 million criminal prosecutions in homicides in Manhattan, and has a rate of 90 per- cent success. A graduate of Yale Law School, District Attorney Morgenthau served aboard a Naval destroyer through World War II. It’s a real pleasure to have you before our Committee. STATEMENT OF ROBERT MORGENTHAU, DISTRICT ATTORNEY, NEW YORK COUNTY, NEW YORK Mr. MORGENTHAU. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the opportunity of testifying today, and I’m pleased to join those who endorse the nomination of Judge Sotomayor to the United States Supreme Court. I first came to know Judge Sotomayor when I was on a recruiting trip to the Yale Law School. At that time, Jose´ Cabranes was Yale’s general counsel. He also tought at the law school. I asked him if there was anyone special I should speak with and he said, yes. He said a remarkable student named Sonia Sotomayor was de- ciding where to work, and while he did not know whether she’d given any thought to being a prosecutor, it would be well worth my while to meet her. He was decidedly correct. I’m happy to be able to say that the Judge joined my office and remained with us for 5 years. In my conversations with her, I learned about the compelling story of her life with which you are now familiar. In a nutshell, she was raised by her mother in a working-class home in South Bronx, and as a teenager worked the evening shift in a garment factory to help make ends meet. She went on through hard work and force of will to overcome her initial VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00496 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 485 difficulties with English composition to win Princeton University’s highest undergraduate honor, the Pyne Prize, and to graduate with Honors from the Yale Law School. In the District Attorney’s Office, the Judge was immediately rec- ognized by trial judges—and supervisors as someone ‘‘a step ahead of her colleagues’’, ‘‘one of the brightest and most mature, hard- working, stand-out’’, ‘‘was marked for rapid advancement. Ulti- mately, she took on every kind of criminal case that comes into an urban courthouse, from turnstile jumping to homicide. One of those cases, the ‘‘Tarzan’’ murder case, involved an ad- dicted burglar named Richard Maddicks, who had terrorized the neighborhood during crime sprees that left three dead and involved his swinging into apartment windows from rooftops, shooting any- one in his way. He is now serving a 137 years to life sentence. Another case prosecuted by Assistant D.A. Sotomayor in 1983 in- volved a Times Square child pornography operation. That was the first child prosecution in New York after a landmark 1982 Supreme Court decision, People v. Furman, upholding New York’s new child pornography laws. Assistant D.A. Sotomayor left the jurors in tears over what the defendants had done to child victims. These cases happened to grab the public attention, but Judge Sotomayor—Assistant D.A. Sotomayor—understood that every case is important to the victim and appropriately gave undivided attention to the proper disposi- tion of all of them. Assistant District Attorney Sotomayor soon developed a reputa- tion. Unlike many beginning prosecutors, she simply would not be pushed around, by judges or by attorneys. Some judges were eager to dispose of cases cheaply to clear their calendars. ADA Sotomayor, instead, fought for the right conclusion in each case. Maybe that experience in the criminal court in New York City helped her prepare for these hearings. After leaving my office, Judge Sotomayor joined a prominent law firm and also accepted a part-time appointment of the New York City Campaign Finance—there she continued to earn a reputation for being tough, fair, nonpolitical in an arena where those charac- teristics were sorely needed, and she has taken those characteris- tics with her to the Federal bench, where they are equally impor- tant. Judge Sotomayor’s career in the law has spanned three decades and she has worked in almost every level of our judicial system: prosecutor, private litigator, trial court judge, and an appellate court judge in what I think is the second-most important court in the world. She has been an able champion of the law and her depth of experience will be invaluable on our highest court. Judge Sotomayor is highly qualified for any position in which a first-rate intellect, common sense, collegiality, and good character would be assets. I might add that the Judge will be the only mem- ber of the Supreme Court with experience trying criminal cases in the State courts. The overwhelming majority of American prosecu- tions occur in State courts. Judge Sotomayor will bring to the court a full understanding of problems faced by prosecutors in those cases, as well as a first- hand knowledge of the trauma faced by victims and of the legiti- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00497 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 486 mate needs of police officials that work in the State law enforce- ment system. She will also understand the impact of Federal judi- cial decisions on State prosecutions. In short, the Judge is uniquely qualified, by intellect, experience, and commitment to the rule of law to be an outstanding—and I re- peat, outstanding—member of the court. President Obama, and for that matter the United States, should be proud to see once more the realization of that simple American credo, that in this country a hardworking person with talent can rise from humble beginnings to one of the highest positions in the land. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify today. Senator CARDIN. Thank you very much for your testimony. We’ll now hear from Wade Henderson, a familiar person to this Committee. Wade Henderson is the president and CEO of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights and counsel to the Leader- ship Conference Education Fund. He is a professor of public inter- est law at the University of the District of Columbia. Prior to his role with the Leadership Conference, Mr. Henderson was the Washington Bureau Director of the NAACP. Mr. Henderson is a graduate from Rutgers University School of Law. Mr. Henderson. STATEMENT OF WADE HENDERSON, PRESIDENT AND CEO, LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE ON CIVIL RIGHTS Mr. HENDERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sessions, members of the Committee. I have the privilege of rep- resenting the views of the Leadership Conference, the Nation’s leading civil and human rights coalition, consisting of more than 200 organizations working to build an America that’s as good as its ideals. This afternoon I will briefly address four of the points that have figured in the debate about Judge Sotomayor’s nomination: first, her qualifications for serving on the Nation’s highest court; second, her personal background and her empathy for others who have had to work hard to succeed; third, her role in the unanimous ruling by a three-judge panel in the case of Ricci v. DeStefano; and fourth, her past membership on the board of one of the Leadership Con- ference’s member organizations, the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund. First, let me rejoice in what is self-evident. The nomination of Judge Sotomayor to be an Associate Justice on our Nation’s highest court is a milestone by many standards. The Nation’s first African- American President has nominated the first Hispanic-American, only the third woman, and only the third person of color to serve on the Supreme Court. While great challenges remain on our Na- tion’s quest for equal opportunity, we have truly reached an his- toric marker on the journey toward our goal of ‘‘Equal Justice For All’’, the phrased inscribed not far from here on the front of the Su- preme Court building. But hopeful and historic as her nomination has been, Judge Sotomayor should herself be just not by who she is, but by what she has done. Now, let me be as clear as I can: there is no question that she is qualified. Judge Sotomayor’s eloquent and thoughtful testimony before this Committee speaks for itself. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00498 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 487 Her distinguished career at Princeton and Yale Law School have been much stated. She then spent 5 years as a prosecutor, as we’ve heard, in Manhattan, working for the legendary District Attorney Robert Morgenthau—pleased to have him here today—and 8 years as a corporate litigator. Seventeen years as a Federal District Court judge and appellate court judge add up to an individual who is one of the most qualified to have ever come before this Com- mittee. Second, as with other nominees across the philosophical spec- trum, including Justice’s Thomas and Alito, Judge Sotomayor has spoken of her family history and her personal struggles. These ex- periences help her to understand others and to do justice. They fur- ther qualify her for the highest court, and she has said and done nothing that could reasonably be understood otherwise. Third, Judge Sotomayor has participated in thousands of cases and authored hundreds of opinions, but much of the debate about her nomination has concentrated on the difficult case of Ricci v. DeStefano. Whatever one may feel about the facts of this case, we all agree that the Supreme Court, in its Ricci decision, set a new standard for interpreting Title 7 of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Using this one decision to negate Judge Sotomayor’s 17 years on the bench does a disservice to her record and to this country. Fourth, I must speak to the attacks on Judge Sotomayor because of her service on the board of one of our Nation’s leading civil rights organizations. These attacks do an injustice not only to Judge Sotomayor and to the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Edu- cation Fund, but also to the entire civil rights community and to all those who look to us for a measure of justice. Make no mistake, legal defense funds play an indispensable role in American life. They are private attorneys general that assist in- dividuals, often those with few resources and no other representa- tion, to become full shareholders in the American dream. When Justice Thurgood Marshall was nominated there were those who questioned his role with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, but history does not remember their quibbles kindly. Judge Sotomayor has lived the American dream and she understands all who aspire to it. Her qualifications are unquestioned and the les- sons that she has learned in her life, as well as in libraries, will serve her and our country well in the years ahead. All those who walk through the entrance to the Supreme Court seeking what is inscribed above its door, ‘‘Equal Justice Under Law’’, can be con- fident that a Justice Sotomayor will continue to do her part to keep the promise of our courts and our country. Thank you very much. Senator CARDIN. Well, thank you very much—for your testimony. We’ll now hear from Frank Ricci, a name that’s been mentioned second only to Sotomayor during this hearing. Frank Ricci has over a decade of experience as a firefighter with the New Haven Fire Department and was a plaintiff in the case of Ricci v. DeStefano. He’s a contributing author of two books on firefighting. It’s a pleasure to have you before the Committee. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00499 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 488 STATEMENT OF FRANK RICCI, DIRECTOR OF FIRE SERVICES, CONNECTICOSH (CONNECTICUT COUNSEL ON OCCUPA- TIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH) Mr. RICCI. Thank you, Senator. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before this distinguished Committee. I accepted, with honor, the invitation to tell my story. Many others have a similar story and I feel I’m speaking for them as well. The New Haven firefighters were not alone in their struggle. Firefighters across the country have had to resort to the Federal courts to vindicate their civil rights. Technology and modern threats have challenged our profession. We have become more ef- fective and efficient, but not safer. The structures we respond to today are more dangerous, constructed with lightweight compo- nents that are prone to early collapse, and we face fires that can double in size every 30 to 60 seconds. Too many think that firefighters just fight fires. Officers are also responsible for mitigating vehicle accidents, hazardous material in- cidents, and handling complicated rescues. Rescue work can be very technical. All of these things require a great deal of knowledge and skill. Lieutenants and Captains must understand the dynamic fire en- vironment and the critical boundaries we operate in. They are forced to make stressful decisions based on imperfect information and coordinate tactics that support our operational objectives. Al- most all our tasks are time-sensitive. When your house is on fire or your life is in jeopardy, there are no time for do-overs. The lieutenant’s test that I took was, without a doubt, a job-re- lated exam that was based on skills, knowledge, and abilities need- ed to ensure public and the firefighters’ safety. We all had an equal opportunity to succeed as individuals and we were all provided a road map to prepare for the exam. Achievement is neither limited nor determined by one’s race, but by one’s skills, dedication, com- mitment, and character. Ours is not a job that can be handed out without regard to merit and qualifications. For this reason, I, and many others, prepared for these positions throughout our careers. I studied harder than I ever had before, reading, making flash cards, highlighting, reading again, all while listening to prepared tapes. I went before numerous panels to pre- pare for the oral assessment. I was a virtual absentee father and husband for months because of it. In 2004, the city of New Haven felt not enough minorities would be promoted and that the political price for complying with Title 7, the city’s civil service rules, and the charter would be too high, therefore they chose not to fill the vacancies. Such action deprived all of us the process set forth by the rule of law. Firefighters who earn promotions were denied them. Despite the important civil rights and constitutional claims we raised, the Court of Appeals panel disposed of our case in an un- signed, unpublished summary order that consisted of a single para- graph that made mention of my dyslexia, and thus led many to think that this was a case about me and a disability. This case had nothing to do with that. It had everything to do with ensuring our command officers were competent to answer the call and our right to advance in our profession based on merit, regardless of race. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00500 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 489 Americans have the right to go into our Federal courts and have their cases judged based on the Constitution and our laws, not on politics or personal feelings. The lower court’s belief that citizens should be reduced to racial statistics is flawed. It only divides peo- ple who don’t wish to be divided along racial lines. The very reason we have civil service rules is to root out politics, discrimination, and nepotism. Our case demonstrates that these ills will exist if the rules of merit and the law are not followed. Our courts are the last resorts for Americans whose rights are violated. Making decisions on who should have command positions solely based on statistics and politics, where the outcome of the de- cision could result in injury or death, is contrary to sound public policy. The more attention our case got, the more some people tried to distort it. It bothered us greatly that some perceived this case as involving a testing process that resulted in minorities being com- pletely excluded from promotions. That was entirely false, as mi- nority firefighters were victimized by the city’s decision as well. As a result of our case, they should now enjoy the career advancement that they’ve earned and deserve. Enduring over 5 years of court proceedings took its toll on us and our families. The case was longer—was no longer just about us, but about so many Americans who had lost faith in the court system. When we finally won our case and saw the messages we received from every corner of the country, we understood that we did some- thing important together: we sought basic fairness and even-hand- ed enforcement of the laws, something all Americans believe in. Again, thank you for the honor and privilege of speaking to you today. Senator CARDIN. Mr. Ricci, thank you very much for your testi- mony. We’ll now hear from Lieutenant Ben Vargas. Benjamin Vargas is a lieutenant in the New Haven Fire Department and was a plain- tiff in the case of Ricci v. DeStefano. He also worked part-time as a consultant for a company that sells equipment to firefighters. Mr. Vargas. STATEMENT OF LIEUTENANT BEN VARGAS, NEW HAVEN FIRE DEPARTMENT Mr. VARGAS. Thank you. Members of this Committee, it is truly an honor to be invited here today. Notably, since our case was summarily dismissed by both the District Court and the Court of Appeals panel, this is the first time I’m being given the opportunity to sit and testify before a body and tell my story. I thank you for this—Committee for the opportunity. Senators of both parties have noted the importance of this pro- ceeding because decisions of the United States Supreme Court can greatly impact the everyday lives of ordinary Americans. I suppose that I and my fellow plaintiffs have shown how true that is. I never envisioned being a plaintiff in a Supreme Court case, much less one that generated so much media and public interest. I am His- panic and proud of the heritage and background that Judge Sotomayor and I share, and I congratulate Judge Sotomayor on her nomination. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00501 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 490 But the focus should not have been on me being Hispanic. The focus should have been on what I did to earn a promotion to cap- tain, and how my own government and some courts responded to that. In short, they didn’t care. I think it important for you to know what I did, that I played by the rules and then endured a long process of asking the courts to enforce those rules. I am the proud father of three young sons. For them, I sought to better my life and so I spent 3 months in daily study preparing for an exam that was unquestionably job-related. My wife, a special education teacher, took time off from work to see me and our chil- dren through this process. I knew we would see little of my sons during these months when I studied every day at a desk in our basement, so I placed photo- graphs of my boys in front of me. When I would get tired and went to stop—wanted to stop, I would look at the pictures, realize that their own futures depended on mine, and I would keep going. At one point, I packed up and went to a hotel for days to avoid any distractions, and those pictures came with me. I was shocked when I was not rewarded for this hard work and sacrifice, but I actually was penalized for it. I became not Ben Vargas the fire lieutenant who proved himself qualified to be cap- tain, but a racial statistic. I had to make decisions whether to join those who wanted promotions to be based on race and ethnicity or join those who would insist on being judged solely on their quali- fications and the content of their character. I am proud of the deci- sion I made, and proud of the principle that our group vindicated together. In our profession, we do not have the luxury of being wrong or having long debates. We must be correct the first time and make quick decisions under the pressure of time and rapidly unfolding events. Those who make these decisions must have the knowledge necessary to get it right the first time. Unlike the judicial system, there are no continuances, motions or appeals. Errors and delays can cost people their lives. In our profession, the racial and ethnic make-up of my crew is the least important thing to us and to the public we serve. I believe that countless Americans who had something to say about our case understand that now. Firefighters and their leaders stand between their fellow citizens and catastrophe. Americans want those who are the most knowledge and qualified to do the task. I am willing to risk, and even lay down, my life for fellow citizens, but I was not willing to go along with those who placed racial identity over these more critical considerations. I am not a lawyer, but I quickly learned about the law as it ap- plied to this case. Studying it as much as I studied for my exam, I thought it clear that we were denied our fundamental civil rights. I expected Lady Justice with the blindfolds on, and a reasoned opinion from a Federal Court of Appeals telling me, my fellow plaintiffs, and the public that the court’s view on the law—what the court’s view on the law was, and do it in an open and trans- parent way. Instead, we were devastated to see a one-paragraph, unpublished order summarily dismissing our case, and indeed even the notion that we had presented important legal issues to that Court of Appeals. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00502 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 491 I expected the judges who heard my case along the way to make the right decisions, the ones required by the rule of law. Of all that has been written about our case, it was Justice Alito who best cap- tured our own feelings. We did not ask for sympathy or empathy, we asked only for even-handed enforcement of the law, and prior to the majority Justice opinion in our case, we were denied just that. Thank you. Senator CARDIN. Thank you for your testimony. We’ll now hear from Peter Kirsanow. Peter Kirsanow serves on the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. He’s a member of the Na- tional Labor Relations Board, where he received a recess appoint- ment from President George W. Bush. Previously, he was a partner with the Cleveland law firm of Benesch, Friedlander, Coplan & Aronoff. Mr. Kirsanow received his law degree from Cleveland State University. STATEMENT OF PETER KIRSANOW, COMMISSIONER, U.S. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS Mr. KIRSANOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Sessions, members of the Committee. I am Peter Kirsanow, member of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. I am currently back at Benesch, Friedlander in the Labor Employment Practice Group. I’m here in my personal capacity. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights was established by the—— Senator SESSIONS. Is that microphone on? Mr. KIRSANOW. The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights was estab- lished by the 1957 Civil Rights Act to, among other things, act as a national clearinghouse for information related to denials of equal protection and discrimination. In furtherance of the clearinghouse process, my assistant and I reviewed the opinions in civil rights cases in which Judge Sotomayor participated while on the Second Circuit in the context of prevailing civil rights jurisprudence, and with particular atten- tion to the case of Ricci v. DeStefano. Our review revealed at least three significant concerns with respect to the manner in which the three-judge panel that included Judge Sotomayor handled the case. The first concern was, as you’ve heard, the summary disposition of this particular case. The Ricci case contained constitutional issues of extraordinary importance and impact. For example, the issues of—that are very controversial and volatile—racial quotas and racial discrimination. This was a case of first impression, no Second Circuit or Supreme Court precedent on point. Indeed, to the extent there were any cases that could provide guidance, such as Wygant, Crowson, Adderand, even private sector cases such as Johnson Transportation, Frank v. Xerox, Rubber v. Steelworkers, would dictate or suggest a result opposite of that reached by the Sotomayor panel. The case contained a host of critical issues for review, yet the three-judge panel summarily disposed of the case, as you’ve heard, in an unpublished, one-paragraph pro curium opinion that’s usu- ally reserved for cases that are relatively simple, straightforward, and inconsequential. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00503 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 492 The second concern is that the Sotomayor panel’s order would in- evitably result in proliferation of de facto racial and ethnic quotas. The standard endorsed by the Sotomayor panel was lower than that adopted by the Supreme Court’s test of strong basis in evi- dence. Essentially, any race-based—decision evoked to avoid a dis- parate impact lawsuit would provide immunity from Title 7 review. Under this standard, employees who fear the prospect or expense of litigation, regardless of the merits of the case, would have a green light to resort to racial quotas. But even more invidious is the use of quotas due to racial poli- tics, and as Judge Alito’s concurrence showed, there was glaringly abundant evidence of racial politics in the Ricci case. Had the Sotomayor panel decision prevailed, employees would have license to use racial preferences and quotas on an expansive scale. Evi- dence introduced before the Civil Rights Commission shows that when courts open the door to preferences just a crack, preferences expand exponentially. For example, evidence adduced before hearings of the Civil Rights Commission in 2005 and 2006 show that despite the fact that Adderand was passed more than—or decided more than 10 years ago, Federal agencies persist in using race-conscious pro- grams in Federal contracting, governmental contracting as opposed to race-neutral alternatives. Moreover, even though the Supreme Court had struck down the use of raw numerical rating in college admissions in Gratz v. Bollinger, thereby requiring that race be only a mere plus factor, a thumb on the scale in the admissions process, powerful preferences show no signs of abating. A study by the Center for Equal Opportunity showed that at a major university, preferences were so great that the odds that a minority applicant would be admitted over a similarly situated white comparative were 250:1, at another major university, 1,115:1. That’s not a thumb on the scale, that’s an anvil. And had the rea- soning of the Ricci case in the lower court prevailed, what hap- pened to Firefighter Ricci and Lieutenant Vargas would happen to innumerably more Americans of every race throughout the country. The third concern is that the lower court’s decision that would permit racial engineering by employers would actually harm mi- norities who are purported beneficiaries of that particular decision. Evidence adduced at a 2006 Civil Rights Commission hearing shows that there’s increasing data that preferenced—preferences create mismatch effects that actually increase the probabilities that minorities will fail if they receive beneficial treatment or pref- erential treatment. For example, black law students who are admitted under pref- erences are 2.5 times more likely not to graduate than a similarly situated white or Asian comparative, 4 times as likely not to pass the bar exam on the first try, and 6 times as likely never to pass the bar exam, despite multiple attempts. Mr. Chairman, it is respectfully submitted that if a nominee’s in- terpretive doctrine permits an employer to treat one group pref- erentially today, there’s nothing that prevents them from treating another group or shifting the preferences to another group tomor- row, and that’s contrary to the colorblind ideal contemplated by the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00504 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 493 1964 Civil Rights Act, Title 7, which was the issue decided in the Ricci case. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. And thank you for your testimony. We’ll now hear from Linda Chavez, who is chairman of the Cen- ter for Equal Opportunity and a political analyst for Fox News Channel. She’s held a number of appointed positions, among them White House Director of Public Liaison, and Staff Director of U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. STATEMENT OF LINDA CHAVEZ, PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR EQUAL OPPORTUNITY Ms. CHAVEZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. I testify today not as a wise Latina woman, but as an American who believes that skin color and national origin should not determine who gets a job, a promotion, or a public contract, or who gets into colleges or receives a fellowship. My message today is straightforward: Mr. Chairman, do not vote to confirm this nominee. I say this with some regret, because I be- lieve Judge Sotomayor’s personal story is an inspiring one, which proves that this is truly a land of opportunity where circumstances of birth and class do not determine whether you can succeed. Un- fortunately, based on her statements both on and off the bench, I do not believe Judge Sotomayor shares that view. It is clear from her record that she has drunk deep from the well of identity politics. I know a lot about that well, and I can tell you that it is dark and poisonous. It is, in my view, impossible to be a fair judge and also believe that one’s race, ethnicity and sex should determine how someone will rule as a judge. Despite her as- surances to this Committee over the last few days that her ‘‘wise Latina’’ woman statement was simply a ‘‘rhetorical flourish that fell flat’’, nothing could be further from the truth. All of us in pub- lic life have at one time or another misspoken, but Judge Sotomayor’s words weren’t uttered off the cuff. They were carefully crafted, repeated not just once or twice, but at least seven times over several years. As others have pointed out, if Judge Sotomayor were a white man who suggested that whites or males made better judges, again, to use Judge Sotomayor’s words, ‘‘whether born from experi- ence or inherent physiological or cultural differences’’, we would not be having this discussion because the nominee would have been forced to withdraw once those words became public. But of course, Judge Sotomayor’s offensive words are just a re- flection of her much greater body of work as an ethnic activist and judge. Identity politics is at the core of who this woman is. And let me be clear here. I’m not talking about the understandable pride in one’s ancestry or ethnic groups, which is both common and nat- ural in a country as diverse and pluralistic as ours. Identity politics involves a sense of grievance against the majority, a feeling that racism permeates American society and its institutions, and the be- lief that members of one’s own group are victims in a perpetual power struggle with the majority. From her earliest days at Princeton University and later Yale Law School, to her 12-year involvement with the Puerto Rican VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00505 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 494 Legal Defense and Education Fund, to her speeches and writings, including her jurisprudence, Judge Sotomayor has consistently dis- played an affinity for such views. I have outlined at much greater length in my prepared testi- mony—which I ask permission be included in the record in full— the way in which I believe identity politics has permeated Judge Sotomayor’s life’s work. But let me briefly outline a few examples. As an undergraduate, she actively pushed for race-based goals and time tables for faculty hiring. In her much-praised senior thesis, she refused to identify the U.S. Congress by its proper name, in- stead referring to it as the ‘‘North American Congress’’, or the ‘‘mainland Congress’’. During her tenure as chair of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund’s Director Litigation Committee, she urged quota-seeking lawsuits challenging civil service exams, seeking race-conscious decision making similar to that used by the city of New Haven in Ricci. She opposed the death penalty as racist. She supported race- based government contracting. She made dubious arguments in support of bilingual education and, more broadly, in trying to equate English language requirements as a form of national origin discrimination. As a Judge, she dissented from an opinion that the Voting Rights Act does not give prison inmates the right to vote, and she has said that as a witness—a witness’ identification of an assailant may be unconstitutional racial profiling, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause, if race is an element of that identifica- tion. Finally, she has shown a willingness to let her policy preferences guide her in the Ricci case. Although she has attempted this week to back away from some of her own intemperate words and has accused her critics of taking them out of context, the record is clear: identity politics is at the core of Judge Sotomayor’s self-definition. It has guided her involve- ment in advocacy groups, been the topic of much of her public writ- ing and speeches, and influenced her interpretation of law. There is no reason to believe that her elevation to the Supreme Court will temper this inclination, and much reason to fear that it will play an important role in how she approaches the cases that will come before her if she is confirmed. I, therefore, respectfully urge you not to confirm Judge Sotomayor as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. Thank you. Senator CARDIN. Thank you for your testimony. [The prepared statement of Ms. Chavez appear as a submission for the record.] Senator CARDIN. Let me, first, recognize our Chairman, Chair- man Leahy, who I understand wants to reserve his place. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator Cardin. One, I thank you and the other Senators who have filled in on this part. I was here throughout the—throughout all the testimony by Judge Sotomayor and the questions asked by both Republicans and Democrats, so I will reserve my time. I do welcome all the witnesses, both for and against the nominee. Senator Sessions and I joined together to make sure that everybody VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00506 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 495 was invited, everybody was given a chance to testify. And if you wish to add to your testimony, the record will be open for 24 hours for you to do that. Thank you very much. Senator CARDIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mayor Bloomberg, let me start with you, if I might, in my ques- tioning. There’s been a lot of discussion about the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, including during this panel discussion. And Judge Sotomayor served on the board, had nothing to do with the selection of individual cases from the point of view of its content, but served in a voluntary capacity with that board. And first I’m going to quote from you and then give you a chance, perhaps, to expand upon it. You have been quoted saying, ‘‘Only in Washington could someone’s many years of volunteer service to a highly regarded nonprofit organization that has done so much good for so many be twisted into a negative and that that group has made countless important contributions to New York City.’’ I just want to give you a chance to respond to Judge Sotomayor’s service on the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund. Mayor BLOOMBERG. Well, this is an organization that has de- fended people who don’t have the wherewithal to get private coun- sel, don’t have traditions of understanding the law, and it happens to focus on people mainly who come from Puerto Rico and have lan- guage problems in addition to a lack of, perhaps, understanding of how our court system works. And it provides the kind of representation that we all, I think, believe that everybody that appears before a judge and before the law deserves. They raise money privately to pay lawyers to defend, and I don’t agree with some of their positions, and I agree with other ones. But having more of these organizations is a lot better than having less. At least people do have the option of getting good representation. Senator CARDIN. Thank you. Mr. Henderson, during the hearing of Judge Sotomayor we had a chance to talk a little bit about voting rights and the recent case before the Supreme Court, and the fact that one Justice questioned the constitutionality, in fact, pretty well determined the constitu- tionality of the—reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act, saying it was no longer relevant. Judge Sotomayor, during her testimony, talked about deference to Congress, the fact that it was passed by a 98:0 vote in the U.S. Senate, and by a lopsided vote in the House of Representatives, the 25-year extension. I just want to get your comments as to whether the Voting Rights Act is relevant today and your confidence level of Judge Sotomayor as it relates to advancing civil rights for the people of our Nation. Mr. HENDERSON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your question. Let me back up for just a minute and say that these hearings have really been a testament to the wisdom of the founding fathers in setting up a three-part system of government, with the President making a nomination for an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court and the Senate Judiciary Committee providing its advice and consent. Under our system of government, the Senate and the House have a particular responsibility to delve deeply into the con- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00507 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 496 stitutional rights of all Americans, particularly around the right to vote. Voting really is the language of democracy. If you can’t vote, you don’t count. And the truth is that, notwithstanding the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments, African-Americans, Latinos, women, other people of color, were often denied their right to vote well into the 20th cen- tury. It took not just those amendments, but actually a statute enacted by this Congress to ensure that the rights of Americans to vote, in- deed, could be preserved, and it was only in the aftermath of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that we have seen the expansion of the franchise and democratization of our, you know, Republic in a way that serves the interest of the founders. Having said that, Congress reached a decision and we authorize in the Voting Rights Act in 2006 that this law was necessary. Six- teen thousand pages of a congressional record speak eloquently to that important interest. The fact that this issue was held, both with congressional review and also a national commission set up by the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights and others in the civil rights community, holding hearings around the country, added to the record that was created. The fact that this bill passed, rather the reauthorization of the Voting Rights Act, 390:33 in the House and 98:0 in the Senate speaks eloquently about the important need of this Act, and the continuing need for it. So the fact that some on the Supreme Court found otherwise doesn’t disturb me at all. There is a need for it. That need continues, and notwithstanding evidence. Senator CARDIN. Well, thank you for correcting my numbers on— the number that it voted by. I appreciate that. I just wanted to ask Mr. McDaniel a quick question. That is, dur- ing the confirmation hearings both Democratic and Republican Senators have been urging from our nominee to look at what the law is, and not judge based upon an emotion. You have to follow the precedents of the court. I have a simple question to you in the Ricci case. Do you believe that the Sotomayor decision with the three-judge panel was within the mainstream of judicial decision making when that decision was reached? Mr. MCDANIEL. Senator, I do believe that. And to hear the sto- ries of these—these firefighters in person, I—I don’t have any rea- son not to use the word ‘‘empathy’’. I have a great deal of empathy for the circumstances that they have described, and I don’t know that I have a great deal for how the city fathers handled the mat- ter. But by the time it made it to the Second Circuit, I believe that the panel did what the law required and I don’t think that there is a grant—a just legal criticism for the way that the panel handled the matter, and the fact that the Supreme Court chose to change the law in a bare majority also is their prerogative. Senator CARDIN. Thank you very much. Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. I thank all of you. This is a very important panel. Actually, much of your testimony was moving and I appreciate it, and I think you’re calling us to a higher level of dis- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00508 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 497 cussion on these issues because they go to the core of who we are as Americans, and I just want to share that. We are worried about the Second Amendment. I will just as the Mayor, you signed a brief in favor of the DC gun ban, which would bar even a handgun in someone’s home, so I would assume you would be agreeable with the opinion of Judge Sotomayor and her view. We’ve got different views about these things. Mayor, I want to tell you, I appreciate your leadership. It’s a tough job to be Mayor of New York. You’re showing strength and integrity. Mr. Morgenthau, you’re the dean of prosecutors. I hear many people over the years that have worked for you and they’re very complimentary of you, and I know you’re proud of this prote´ge´e of yours who’s moved forward. Mr. MORGENTHAU. Senator, may I tell you that my grandmother was born in Montgomery, Alabama? Senator SESSIONS. I am impressed to hear that. [Laughter.] Senator SESSIONS. I feel better already. Oh, that’s good. Mr. Attorney General, thank you for your able comments. And Mr. Henderson, it’s good to work with you. Senator Leahy and I— I’m talking, during these hearings, we’re going to do that crack co- caine thing that you and I have talked about before. We’ve got to. [Laughter.] Mr. HENDERSON. Thank you, Senator. I appreciate it. Senator SESSIONS. I may want to restate that. [Laughter.] Senator SESSIONS. Let me correct the record. Ms. CHAVEZ. Please rephrase it, Senator. Please rephrase. Senator SESSIONS. I misspoke. Mr. HENDERSON. No. Quite all right. Senator SESSIONS. We’re going to reduce the burden of penalties in some of the crack cocaine cases and make them fairer. So Mr. Ricci, thank you for your work. I would say, Mr. Hender- son, that I said the PRLDEF Legal Defense Fund is a good organi- zation in my opening statement, and I think it has—it—it has every right to advocate those positions that it does. But the nomi- nee was on the board for a long time and it did take some positions that she rightly was asked about, whether or not she agreed to it, especially during some of those times she was chairman of the Liti- gation Committee. But I value these—I value that groups can come together and file lawsuits and take the matter to the court. Just briefly, Mr. Kirsanow, on a slightly different subject than you started, I think you probably know this answer, but could you tell us, for the purpose of this hearing, as briefly as you can, what the concern is in the Voting Rights Act? It’s not that we’re against—anybody is against voting rights. I voted for it. But there are some constitutional concerns. Could you share precisely what that is? Mr. KIRSANOW. Sure. And specifically with respect to the latest Supreme Court decision related to that, what was articulated is that the pre-clearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act pertain to a legacy of discrimination that occurred in many States where poll taxes and literacy tests were being imposed on black citizens. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00509 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 498 However, in this particular case the Austin political subdivision came into existence after all of the—the legacy of this discrimina- tion had actually occurred, or even after the Voting Rights Act itself had been passed. The question is, how can it be that you’ve got a preexisting law that is almost, for lack of a better term, ex-post facto, applying to an organization that came into existence after the law was in ef- fect. There was no history of discrimination or denials of equal pro- tection or denial of voting rights by this particular political subdivi- sion, so it was peculiar in that regard, and I think there were sev- eral justices who evinced some concern about the approach in that particular case. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. It’s just, there are two sides to that story. We passed the bill and we extended it, and all of us had some angst and worry. I said I wanted to vote for it, and we did. We extended it for probably longer than we should have. Not that it would ever end. Huge portions of it would—may never end. But some portions of it may not have been needed to continue. Mr.—Lieutenant Vargas, that was a moving story you gave us. Let me just ask you this. Do you think that other members of the fire department, had they study as—studied as hard as you and mastered the subject matter as well as you did, could have passed the test—more of them would have passed if they’d studied as hard as you? Mr. VARGAS. Absolutely. Senator SESSIONS. You think you—— Mr. VARGAS. Absolutely. I studied with a group of them and they all supported me on what I was doing because they knew the effort that I put in and—and they were right there. We really weren’t all that far behind. And, you know, minorities would have been pro- moted. That’s something that—that continues to get left out. There would have been minorities promoted to captain, minorities pro- moted to lieutenant as well, and, you know, when you take these exams, sometimes you have winners and sometimes—you know, but you go into that situation knowing that that’s going to be the case. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Kirsanow, you indicated that all the judges, I believe your phrase was, on the Supreme Court, rejected the standard of review that the panel, Justice Sotomayor’s panel, set for the firefighter exam. Is that right? Mr. KIRSANOW. Senator, even the dissent had a different stand- ard. It was a good cause standard which would have given a little bit more definitiveness to the approach that defendants could take in defending. As you know, Title 7 has a safe harbor of job-related, consistent with business necessity. If you can establish that in fact the test that the firefighters took were job-related, consistent with business necessity, then only under those circumstances—the only way you could show a disparate impact if—is if those tests weren’t made. Even the dissent said it should have been sent back on re- mand. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Ms. Chavez, I noticed one thing. According to the ABA statistics, only 3.5 percent of lawyers in America in 2000 were Hispanic, yet VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00510 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 499 Hispanics make up 5 percent of the Federal District Court judges and 6 percent of Circuit Court judges. Would you comment on that? Ms. CHAVEZ. Well, first of all, I think it’s important—you know, there’s been a lot of attention focused on the phrase ‘‘a wise Latina woman’’. I used it myself, obviously, ironically, in testifying today. But I think it’s important to read Judge Sotomayor’s entire speech because, in fact, it wasn’t just that she was saying a wise Latina woman would make a better judge. What she was saying was that the race, ethnicity and gender of judges would, and should, make a difference in their judging. And she says in the speech itself, she says she doesn’t know al- ways how that’s going to happen, but she even cites some studies, sociological studies, that took—take a look at the way in which women judges have handed down decisions and makes the case that women judges decide cases differently than men do, and she speaks of this approvingly. And she talks about statistics and how few Latinos there are on the bench. And the statistics that you just cited come from an article that I wrote in Retort to the statistics that she used. I bring that up because inherent in that analysis of hers is the notion that there ought to be proportional representation on judi- cial panels, that we ought to be selecting judges based on race, eth- nicity and gender, and that we ought to have more or less propor- tional representation. And I have to say that, you know, that really I think comes very close to arguing for quotas, a position, by the way, that she has taken with—when she was with the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund. By the way, she was not just on the board, she actually signed some memoranda. Those are in the record, and I’ve cited some instances of that in my written testimony. And the point is that if there is so-called under representation of some groups, it means there’s over-representation of others. And I said in my testimony that if we are concerned about the number of Latino judges, the first thing you need to be a judge is a college degree and a law degree. And, in fact, if just using Judge Sotomayor’s own statistics, if anything, if you look at the number of attorneys who are Latino at the time that she was writing, His- panics were actually somewhat over-represented on the judicial bench. I reject all of that. That doesn’t bother me in the least that they are over-represented. I think we should not be making eth- nicity and race or gender a qualification for sitting on the bench, or being a firefighter, or being a captain or a lieutenant on a fire- fighting team. I think we ought to take race, ethnicity and gender out of the equation. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Senator CARDIN. Senator Durbin. Senator DURBIN. Ms. Chavez, do you think that Judge Sotomayor’s being awarded the Pyne Award at Princeton for high academic achievement and good character, being summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa was because it was a quota, that they wanted to make sure there was a Latina who received that? Ms. CHAVEZ. No, I don’t. And, in fact, what is interesting about Judge Sotomayor’s tenure at Princeton University is that she has said that she was admitted as an affirmative action admittee be- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00511 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 500 cause her test scores were not comparable to that of her peers. But she also has talked about what happened to her when she got there, and that she recognized that in fact she was not particularly well-prepared, that she did not write well and that one of her pro- fessors pulled her aside and said she had to work on her writing skills. Senator DURBIN. So that would have been—— Ms. CHAVEZ. I admire—— Senator DURBIN. Excuse me. That would make it a pretty amaz- ing story then. Ms. CHAVEZ. That’s right. And I wish that that was the story that she was telling Latinos, that she—— Senator DURBIN. I think that’s the story of her life that I’m de- scribing. Ms. CHAVEZ. Well, it—I wish that what she was telling Latinos is that if you do what Ben Vargas has done, if you do what Frank Ricci has done, if you take home the books and you study them and you memorize what you need to know so that you can pass the test like I did when I took home grammar books—— Senator DURBIN. Well, I—— Ms. CHAVEZ.—and learned how to write standard English, that that should be the story, not that she should be insisting on racial quotas and racial preferences. Senator DURBIN. Ms. Chavez, I think that—I think that the story of her life is one of achievement, overcoming some odds that many people have never faced in her family life and personal life. Mr. Morgenthau, when you were alerted about her skills in law school, did they tell you that they had an opportunity here for you to hire a wise Latina lawyer? Is that what you were in the market for? Mr. MORGENTHAU. Absolutely not. Senator DURBIN. Would you—if you could speak in the micro- phone, I’d sure appreciate it. Mr. MORGENTHAU. I’m sorry. Absolutely not. I mean, I took one look at her resume, you know, summa cum laude at Princeton, the Yale Law Journal, and I said—and then I talked to her and—and I thought she had common sense and judgment and willingness to work. The fact that she was Latino or Latina had absolutely noth- ing to do with it. And may I just use this opportunity to say that I was one of the founding directors of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund and the reason I did that was I thought it was important to represent a way under-represented minority—you know, you’re looking back 35, 40 years—to have an organization which was dedicated to help people in Housing Corp discrimination cases. So I urged her to join the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund. I mean, I had become a life member of the NAACP in 1951. I’ve been on the National Commission of the Anti-Defamation League. I think that one of the great strengths of the United States is its di- versity and—and—but we’ve got to help people from the various minority groups make their way and advance. I must say, I’m very critical of some of my friends and relatives who want to forget where they came from, and it’s to her credit that she remembers where she came from. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00512 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 501 Senator DURBIN. And Mayor Bloomberg, I believe you had a quote that I read about Washington being maybe the only place— would you recall that quote on the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund? Mayor BLOOMBERG. Yes. I think that public service is something that certainly you, Senator, know the value of and the satisfaction when you do it. And in New York City, we value those who are willing to give their time and help others. They walk away in many cases from lucrative careers to serve as public defenders or outside of the legal profession in myriad other ways, and the fact that the organizations that they work for sometimes do things that you or I disagree with doesn’t take away from the value that they provide in other things that they do. Senator DURBIN. I’ve been honored to serve on this Committee to consider three Supreme Court nominees. The two previous nomi- nees, Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito, were both white males, and the questioning really came to this central point: do you, as a white male have sensitivity to those unlike yourself, such as minorities and disadvantaged people? Those questions were asked over and over again. In this case where we have a minority woman seeking a position on the Supreme Court, it seems the question is, are you going to go too far on the side of minorities and not really use the law in a fair fashion? Mayor BLOOMBERG. Senator, isn’t the reason that the founding fathers—or at least I assume the reason the founding fathers said nine justices is that they wanted a diverse group of people with dif- ferent life experiences who could work collaboratively and collec- tively to understand what the founding fathers meant generations later on. And so the fact that I—I said before in my testimony, I do not think that no matter how compelling Judge Sotomayor’s life experience and biography is, that’s not the reason to appoint her. Certainly we benefit from having a diverse group of people on the court, in the same way as my city benefits from a diverse group of citizens. Senator DURBIN. Mr. Chairman, if I could ask one last question. I might say, Mr. Mayor, you’re getting dangerously close to empa- thy. [Laughter.] Senator DURBIN. But I happen to agree with you. Mr. Morgenthau, when Judge Sotomayor worked in your office, did you notice whether or not she treated minorities any dif- ferently? Mr. MORGENTHAU. She was right down the middle, Senator. She didn’t treat minorities any differently than she treated everybody else. Right down the middle, looked at the law. She’s tough, but fair. Senator DURBIN. Thank you very much. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. Thank you. Senator Sessions indicated Senator Graham will be next to in- quire. Senator GRAHAM. I’d like to thank my colleagues for the courtesy here. I’ve got to run back and do some things. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00513 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 502 This has been a very good panel, by the way. I think we’re sort of grappling with issues right here in the Senate the country is grappling with, and I’ll try to put it in perspective the best I can. Ms. Chavez, identity politics. I think I know what you’re talking about. I asked the judge about it. It’s a practice of politics I don’t agree with, and I think overall is not the right way to go. But hav- ing said that, I’ve tried to look at the judge in totality. The Well Qualified rating from the American Bar Association, when it was given to Judge Alito and Roberts, we all embraced it and I used it a couple of times to say that if you thought this per- son had a rigid view of life or the law, it would have been very hard for the ABA to give them a well qualified rating. Does that impress you all that the ABA had a different view in terms of how she might use identity politics on the bench? Ms. CHAVEZ. Well, I’m not sure they dealt with that question. I think they did deal with her record as a judge and the decisions that she has made as a judge. The ABA and I often disagree on matters, so—— Senator GRAHAM. Yeah. I totally understand. Ms. CHAVEZ.—it’s not—— Senator GRAHAM. I totally understand. But I guess the point I’m making, I don’t want to sit here and try to have it both ways, you know, say the ABA is a great thing one day and means nothing the next. Have you ever known a Republican political leader to actively try to seek putting a minority in a position of responsibility to help the party? Ms. CHAVEZ. I think that the idea of giving due deference to making sure that people are representative in diverse ways is a standard way of operating in political circles. Senator GRAHAM. Well, the only reason I mention that, the state- ment you made, ‘‘the way we pick our judges should be based on merit, the way we pick our firefighters’’—I totally agree with that. But politics is politics in the sense that I know that Republicans sit down and think, Okay, we’ve got some power now, let’s make sure that we let the whole country know the Republican party is just not a party of short white guys. Ms. CHAVEZ. I think that’s different, though, Senator, than, as she suggested in her speech, that there ought to be some sort of proportional representation. Senator GRAHAM. Yeah. That’s right. You can go—that’s right. I totally agree. Ms. CHAVEZ. And I think that’s farther. And I also think it mat- ters that we’re not just doing that because we want to see diverse opinions, but it seems to me that what she was saying in her speech was that we do that because blacks, Latinos and women are different, think differently, and will behave differently. I mean, she said that explicitly. Senator GRAHAM. Yeah. Ms. CHAVEZ. She said it may be as a result of physiological dif- ferences. I think any white man that said such a thing about mi- norities or women would be laughed out of this room. Senator GRAHAM. Well, since I’m the white guy that said that, I agree with you. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00514 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 503 [Laughter.] Senator GRAHAM. But the point is that I’m trying to get the coun- try in a spot where you’re not judged by one thing, that we just can’t look at her and say ‘‘that’s it’’. You know, when I look at her I see speeches that bug the hell out of me, as I said before. But I also see something that very much impresses me, and the ABA apparently sees something, and Louis Freeh sees something, and Ken Starr sees something, and, you know, what I want to tell the country is that Republicans very much do sit down and think about political picks and appointments in a political sense to try to show that we’re a party that looks at all Americans and wants to give an opportunity, and that’s just life, and that’s not a bad thing. Now, Mr. Ricci, I would want you to come to my house if it was on fire. [Laughter.] Senator GRAHAM. And I appreciate how difficult this must have been for you to bust your ass and to study so hard and—and to have it all stripped at the end. But I just want you to know, as a country, that we’re probably one generation removed to where, no matter how hard you studied, based on your last name or the color of your skin, you’d have no—no shot. And we’re trying to find some balance. And in your case, I think you were poorly treated and you did not get the day in court you deserved, but all turned out well. It was a 5:4 decision. Maybe we can learn something through your experience. But please don’t lose sight of the fact, not so very long ago the test was rigged a different way. Mr. Vargas, you’re one generation removed from where your last name wouldn’t have been it. Do you understand that? Mr. VARGAS. Yes, sir. Senator GRAHAM. What did you go through personally to stand with Mr. Ricci? What came your way? Did anybody criticize you? Mr. VARGAS. I received lots of criticism. Senator GRAHAM. Well, tell me the kind of criticisms you re- ceived. Mr. VARGAS. But I—I’ve got thick skin. I believe that I’m a per- son with thick skin. Senator GRAHAM. Well, did people call you an Uncle Tom? Mr. VARGAS. Yes. Senator GRAHAM. People thought you were disloyal to the His- panic community? Mr. VARGAS. Absolutely. Yes. Senator GRAHAM. Well, quite frankly, my friend, I think you’ve done a lot for America and the Hispanic community. My hat’s off to you. Mr. VARGAS. Thank you, Senator. Senator GRAHAM. Finally, Mayor, having to govern a city as di- verse as New York must be very, very difficult. Is it also a pleas- ure? Mayor BLOOMBERG. It is a pleasure. And we—I said before you came in that some of the—Judge Sotomayor’s views, I don’t happen to agree with. Some of her decisions, I think, were wrong. We—for example, I disagreed with what the city of New Haven did. In New York City, you should know that our city is a defendant in a case, class action suit in the Justice Department where the challenge is VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00515 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 504 two entry-level tests for our fire department, one given in 1999 be- fore I became mayor, and one afterwards in 2002, and we’re de- fending it on the ground—the suit alleges that the written portions of the test were not germane to the job and it had a disparate im- pact. I’ve chosen to fight this. I think that, in fact, the tests were job-related and were con- sistent with business necessity. This is a case that’s going to go to trial sometime later this year. What we’ve tried to do is to ap- proach it from a different point of view: aggressive recruiting to try to get more minorities to apply to be firefighters, and we have re- vised our test. We’ve had a substantial increase in the number of minorities taking the test, passing the test, and joining our fire department. And I really do believe that that’s a better way to solve the diver- sity problem, which does affect an awful lot of fire departments around this country, rather than throwing out tests and thereby penalizing those who pass the test. Senator CARDIN. Senator Klobuchar. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. I’m going to let Senator Spec- ter, who is—I guess I’m more senior to him only because of a tech- nicality, but also he’s been here longer. So I’m going to let him go, and then I will go after. Senator CARDIN. Senator Specter. Senator SPECTER. No, no. I’ll defer to Senator Klobuchar. [Laughter.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Okay. Here we go. I, first, wanted to thank both firefighters for your service. As a prosecutor, we worked ex- tensively on arson cases and I just got a little sense of what you go through every day and how dangerous your job is. So, thank you for that. I just wanted to follow up on one thing, Ms. Chavez, when you talked about—you clearly know Ms. Sotomayor’s history and her record. But when you talked about how she got into Princeton, you didn’t point out the one thing that I think Mr. Morgenthau did, and that is that she ended up graduating from there summa cum laude, and that certainly is all about numbers and grades, I would think, and not affirmative action. Would that be correct? Ms. CHAVEZ. That’s absolutely right. And I wish that was the message that she was giving to her Hispanic audiences, that she was able to do it, that she was able to overcome adversity, that she was able, because she applied herself and worked hard and put in the hours studying, to be able to succeed, and that is not the mes- sage that she gives. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Okay. But she also was valedictorian of her high school class. Where I went to high school, that was all num- bers and grades and nothing to do with anything else. Isn’t that true? Ms. CHAVEZ. I’m only quoting what she has said herself. I don’t have any idea what her test scores were. I don’t think anyone but she does. But she has said that she got into Princeton, and also Yale, based on the affirmative action programs at those univer- sities. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Okay. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00516 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 505 Mr. Morgenthau, it’s just an honor to meet you. When I was Dis- trict Attorney, I hired a number of people that learned everything they knew from you and your office, so thank you for that. And, in fact, when I did my opening statement I talked about a quote you gave once about how you hired people, and you say, ‘‘we want people with good judgment because a lot of the job of a prosecutor is making decisions’’. You said, ‘‘I also want to see some signs of humility in anybody that I hire. We’re giving young lawyers a lot of power and we want to make sure that they’re going to use that power with good sense and without arrogance’’. Could you talk about those two qualities, the good judgment and the humility, and how you think those qualities may be or may not be reflected in our nominee? Mr. MORGENTHAU. Well, I mean, I think she met all those stand- ards. I—I interviewed her and talked to her, thought she was a hard worker. I thought she would relate to—to the victims and wit- nesses. I thought she had humility. I thought she was fair. I thought she would apply the law. She met all of those standards that I thought were important to me. I hired her entirely on the merits. Entirely on the merits. Nothing to do with her ethnic back- ground or anything else. She was an outstanding candidate on the merits. Senator KLOBUCHAR. There is also a letter that we received from 40 of her colleagues, and one of the things I’ve learned is that while maybe sometimes someone does well in the workplace by their superiors, sometimes their colleagues think something else. And here you have her colleagues talking about the long hours she worked, how she was among the very first in her starting class to be selected to handle felonies. Could you describe how your process works in your office and how certain people get to handle felonies sooner than others? Mr. MORGENTHAU. Well, we have six trial bureaus with about 50, 55 lawyers in each one, and it’s up to the bureau chief, the depu- ties, to decide who should move along. I know one of those people who wrote that letter have gone to—to Princeton and to Yale Law School and studied for the bar with Sonia. I said, ‘‘Damn, I guess she was a little bit ahead of you.’’ And he said, ‘‘She was a full step ahead of us.’’ And she had the—the judgment, the common sense, the knowledge of people, the ability to persuade victims and wit- nesses testifying, and we thought she was a natural to move up to the Supreme Court. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Very good. Mayor Bloomberg, I noted today earlier that the—that Judge Sotomayor has the support of so many law enforcement organiza- tions in New York, National District Attorneys Association. Could you talk about the—what that support means and how—I know you’ve had success, along with Mr. Morgenthau’s amazing record of bringing crime down in New York, working with the police, work- ing with the county attorneys as a team, and while our nominee was a small part of that, one—one Assistant District Attorney, as part of the big effort, what difference that has made to New York. Mayor BLOOMBERG. Well, I think, Senator, the reason that we’ve been able to bring crime down and improve the schools and the economy and all of these things is because I’ve never asked any- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00517 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 506 body or considered their ethnicity, their marital status, orientation, gender, religion, or anything else. I just try to get the best that I possibly can to come to work for the city, and I think the results are there. When I interview for judges—and I’ve appointed something like 140 so far in the last seven-and-a-half years—I look for integrity and professional competence and judicial temperament, and how well they write, and their appellate records, and their reputation for fairness and impartiality, but also we extensively talk to mem- bers of the bar and the bench to see what professionals who have to work with the candidate day in and day out think. It’s very easy to be on your best behavior when you come to Washington and have to testify before a group like this. But the truth of the matter is, your real character comes out when you do it day in and day out over a long period of time, and that’s what your contemporaries see. And so the fact that a lot of people who have worked with this judge think that she is eminently qualified to move up carries an awful lot of weight with me. They can find—they know a lot more about her and her abilities than you or I could ever find out with the short period of time that we interact with her or read of her— read about her decisions, take them out of context of what was going on at the time and we don’t have the ability to do all of the research that her contemporaries have been doing. Senator KLOBUCHAR. So you’re saying that you’d give that a lot more weight than all the questions we’ve been asking for the last 3 days? Mayor BLOOMBERG. No, I wouldn’t—— [Laughter.] Mayor BLOOMBERG. I wouldn’t go quite that far. But I do think that people who work with somebody for a long period of time real- ly do get to know them. And most importantly, people who are on the other side of the issues, on the other side of the bench, if they think that even though sometimes they win and sometimes they lose, their views, to me, matter an awful lot more. Senator KLOBUCHAR. I would agree. Thank you. Senator CARDIN. Senator Hatch. Senator HATCH. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mayor, it’s always good to see you. I appreciate the joy and the verve with which you run New York City. I know that it’s a tough city to run, but you do a great job. Mayor BLOOMBERG. Thank you. Senator HATCH. Mr. Morgenthau, we all respect you. You know that, I know that. You’ve given a long public service that is of great distinction. It’s always good to have attorneys general from any State here, and we’re grateful to have you here, Mr. McDaniel. Mr. Henderson and I have been friends for a long time. We some- times oppose each other, but it’s always been with friendship and kindness. We’re grateful to have you two great people here who do such very important work in the city of New Haven. I know it takes guts to come here, and we appreciate you being here. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00518 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 507 Mr. Kirsanow, let me just—and certainly Mr. Kirsanow, and Linda Chavez, we’ve—we recognize your genius, too, and the things that you bring to the table. Let me just ask you this, Mr. Kirsanow, because I was the one who raised the Ricci case to begin with. I have two related ques- tions about the Ricci case. Do you agree with what Judge Cabranes and the other five judges who agreed with him, that this was a case of first impression in the Second Circuit, which means that there was no precedent? Mr. KIRSANOW. That’s correct, Senator. We took a very strong look as to whether or not there was anything on point. There may have been some peripheral cases that wouldn’t provide any defini- tive guidance. As I indicated in my statement, to the extent there were cases to provide guidance, really EPC—Equal Protection Clause cases, Wygant, so on and so forth, those were the kind of cases you’d have to look to, but none under Title 7. Senator HATCH. Well, explain what was the issue of first impres- sion that these six judges found—— Mr. KIRSANOW. It was—— Senator HATCH [continuing]. In the minority, 7:6, but they— they—— Mr. KIRSANOW. Right. Senator HATCH. Judge Cabranes got very alarmed because this was a summary order that ordinarily they wouldn’t have seen, but he caught it in the newspaper, asked to see it, and then said, my gosh, this is a case of first impression, we ought to do more than just a summary order on it, which is something that I’ve been very critical of. Mr. KIRSANOW. Senator, it was the tension between two provi- sions of Title 7, and that is—— Senator HATCH. You’re talking about disparate treatment and disparate impact? Mr. KIRSANOW. Precisely. Senator HATCH. And this was—— Mr. KIRSANOW. If I could balance the two. And keep in mind that the 1991 amendments were really a product of Griggs v. Duke Power and its progeny. Senator HATCH. Right. Mr. KIRSANOW. And remember that Griggs was really a response to the difficulty in demonstrating intentional discrimination so that there was a resort to disparate impact to try to help prove the case. So whether you give primacy to intentional discrimination or dis- parate impact was what was trying to be determined here, or not necessarily primacy, but trying to evaluate both consistently with the purposes of Title 7. Senator HATCH. Well, please explain the difference between what the Supreme Court split 5:4 and what all nine of the Justices on the Supreme Court—why they criticized Judge Sotomayor’s deci- sion. Mr. KIRSANOW. It had to do with the process by which the deci- sion was reached. Even the dissent, Justice Ginsburg noted in Footnote 10 that this is something that ordinarily should have been sent back on remand because it was to determine whether or—that VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00519 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 508 is, to determine whether or not there was good cause for taking the decision New Haven took. The majority, on the other hand, said the city of New Haven had to have a strong basis in evidence before it discarded the test re- sults. So there were two separate standards by both the majority and the dissent, but neither agreed with the manner in which the Sotomayor panel disposed of the case. Senator HATCH. So all nine Justices on the court agreed that the appropriate law wasn’t followed. Mr. KIRSANOW. Correct. Senator HATCH. And five of them said the city of New Haven was wrong. Mr. KIRSANOW. Correct. Senator HATCH. So the firefighters won. Now, Mr. Vargas, I just want to make that clear, because I don’t think a lot of people realize that, and that’s a very, very big thing to me. Mr. Vargas, your comments about your sons were powerful. What difference does it make for them whether merit or race deter- mines opportunity? What difference does this case mean for them? Mr. VARGAS. I believe this is going to be a greater opportunity for them in the future because they’re not going to be stigmatized that way. They’re not going to be looked at that way, and they’re going to rise and fall on their own merits and—— Senator HATCH. And that’s one reason why you brought this case. Mr. VARGAS. That’s absolutely right. Senator HATCH. Mr. Ricci, I only have a few seconds, but let me say this. I want to thank you for your service, for protecting your fellow citizens up there. As I understand it, the city of New Haven went to great lengths to devise this promotion test that was—the lengths were fair and objective, the test was fair and objective, and not tilted toward or against any demographic group. In fact, I un- derstand that the test was not a question. They worked on the kind and content of the questions so that they were relevant to the job but would not create a hurdle for anyone. They used both a written and an oral exam format, right? Mr. RICCI. Yes. Senator HATCH. Is your understanding of how they worked to put together the test and did—that’s the way they put it together. Did that make you believe that you would be judged on your merits? Mr. RICCI. Yes, Senator. The rules of the game were set up, and we have a right to be judged fairly. And just by taking the test we knew that the test—we didn’t even need to go any further. Just by taking the test we knew that the test was job-related and meas- ured the skills, ability and knowledge needed for a competent fire officer. Senator HATCH. Well, did that make you see this as a genuine opportunity that might indeed be open to you? Mr. RICCI. Yes, Senator. Senator HATCH. Now, tell me more about your expectations when you looked at this opportunity. You were, no doubt, familiar with the racial dynamics that existed in New Haven at the time. Anyone involved in their community anywhere would be aware of that. Did you think that at all, that because the test was so rigorously and VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00520 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 509 fairly designed, that any of those outside racial dynamics would be- come an obstacle to your future service in the fire department as long as you were qualified for the job? Mr. RICCI. No. Myself, and all 20 plaintiffs, including other fire- fighters that didn’t join the suit, including African-Americans and Hispanics, I think we all had the expectation when we took the test that the test would be fair, job-related, and that it was going to be dictated by one’s merit on how well you did on the exam, not by the color of your skin. Senator HATCH. Okay. Now, gentlemen, I just have one statement to make. You made the comment that the Supreme Court changed the law by a major- ity. They didn’t change the law, they actually recognized there was a case of first impression here that had to be decided, and they de- cided it. They didn’t change any laws. Now, it wasn’t by a bare ma- jority. I mean, nine of them said the case should be reexamined, five of them said that New Haven was wrong. I just wanted to make that clear so that everybody would under- stand it, because this is not some itty-bitty case. This is one of the most important cases in the country’s history, and that’s why it’s caused such a furor. I want to compliment all of you firemen for being willing to stand up in this issue, because this is an important issue for people of whatever race, or gender, or ethnicity. You know, you’ve taken a lot of flack for it, and you shouldn’t. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. Thank you. Senator Specter. Senator SPECTER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Ricci, I agree with just about everything you said, that you had a right to go to Federal court and get justice; that racial statis- tics are wrong; what we sought was even-handed justice. And as the court finally decided, you had been deprived of your rights, and made a change. The question that I have for you, do you have any reason to think that Judge Sotomayor acted in anything other than good faith in trying to reach a fair decision in the case? Mr. RICCI. That’s beyond my legal expertise. I’m not an attorney or a legal scholar. I simply welcomed an invitation by the U.S. Sen- ate to come here today and—because this is our first time that we’ve gotten to testify about our story. So I can’t comment on—— Senator SPECTER. Well, I think that it’s really good that you’ve been here and have had a chance to testify. I agree with that to- tally. And there is enormous appreciation for the work the fire- fighters do. I had a lot of association with the firefighters in my days as a city official in Philadelphia. On the homeland security, I’ve been on the forefront of funding for firefighters. And what the firefighters did on 9/11 was—words are inadequate, the heroism and the bravery and the loss of lives and suffering. Lieutenant Vargas, again, I agree with all of your testimony. In your work, you have to get it right the first time. Well, when you have 5:4 decisions, it’s hard to say which way the ball bounces, es- pecially when they get reversed from time to time. But I would ask you the same question I asked of Mr. Ricci, whether you have any VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00521 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 510 reason to doubt the good faith of Judge Sotomayor in coming to the conclusion that she did. Mr. VARGAS. I would have to defer to pretty much the same re- sponse. We were invited here to give our story and—and we want- ed to focus on that, and I really didn’t put much to that. So—— Senator SPECTER. Okay. Well, that’s fair enough. It’s up to the Senate. We hope we get it right. But all anybody can use is their— is their best judgment. Ms. Chavez, when you place so much reliance on Ricci v. DeStefano as a basis for opposing Judge Sotomayor, isn’t that case just overloaded with subtlety and nuance and could have gone the other way? Can you really place much reliance on criticism of Judge Sotomayor as a disqualifier? Ms. CHAVEZ. Well, first of all, Senator Specter, I think I actually went back to criticize Judge Sotomayor’s activities going all the way back to Princeton University, so I don’t think I relied exclu- sively. I think what—and I would answer the question that you asked Mr. Vargas and Mr. Ricci. I do think that Judge Sotomayor, based on her history, her involvement with the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, her writings, her activism, has indi- cated a preference to eliminate testing. She has fought to—to get rid of civil service testing. She has challenged tests as being inherently—standardized tests as being inherently unequal and, as always, arriving at a disparate impact. And I think that activism, that involvement going back decades, did in fact influence the way she approached this case. So I think it is relevant, and that is the reason I’m criticizing it. It is not just her one decision in one case, it is her whole body of work, her whole life experience and the views that she has ex- pressed over several decades. Senator SPECTER. Well, we consistently have nominees for the Supreme Court come to this panel, Justice Alito, Chief Justice Rob- erts, Justice Thomas, on both sides of the ideological divide. And what they do in an advocacy position is customarily set aside to make an evaluation as to their—their competency. When you talk about being a woman or being an Hispanic, it’s my view that that kind of diversity is enormously helpful. I go back to a question I asked Attorney General Meese more than 25 years ago. The debate was raging on affirmative action even more than it is now. If you have two people of equal com- petency and one is a minority, Attorney General Meese, not known for being a flaming liberal, took—took the minority position. My own view is that it’s time we had more women and we had more diversity, and we have to have qualifications. Have to have quali- fications. And I think that’s what ultimately determines this nomi- nation. Attorney General McDaniel, I’m going to ask you a loaded ques- tion. You can handle a loaded question. Do you think, with all of the critical issues we have to face on separation of powers and what the Congress does by way of fact finding and what is done on the Americans With Disabilities Act and trying to find out about warrantless wire taps and the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act and compensation for the survivors of the victims of 9/11, and the intricate relationship to the State Department influencing the way VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00522 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 511 Congress interprets the foreign sovereign immunity, that there is a little too much attention paid to the Ricci case? Not that it’s not very important, but there are a lot of matters that are important. Isn’t this a little heavy on one case? Mr. MCDANIEL. Senator, not—not only do I agree with you about the other issues that should be given ample attention because of their enormous weight, I think that perhaps the wrong focus of at- tention, even on this case, has been applied. Chief Justice Roberts has said that he would like to narrow standing analyses and he would like to be a conservative Justice who wants to look only at the disagreements between two parties and not go beyond the scope of that. One of the important issues in the Ricci case was a standing issue, which was their standing to bring action if one had not been denied promotion. Senator Hatch’s own attorney general joined with me in the brief because we thought that that was among the issues that were important and should have been followed under stare decisis. Instead, the court expanded standing to someone who had not been harmed under the legal standard. I think that that is important to consider. I think that it’s impor- tant to note that if they were going to change standing and stand- ards, I think it’s somewhat unfair to put emphasis on the footnote. For instance, Footnote 10 of Justice Ginsburg, which said that if we are going to change the rules of the game then we should re- mand the case back to be reviewed. But that wasn’t critical of the Second Circuit, in and of—— Senator SPECTER. I regret—— Mr. MCDANIEL. So I agree with you about your—your emphasis or the—on the—— Senator SPECTER. I regret that there is so little time. Having Mayor Bloomberg and Dean Morgenthau, I’d like to really have a chance to cross-examine them. [Laughter.] Senator SPECTER. Except that I agreed with their testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. Thank you, Senator. Senator Cornyn. Senator CORNYN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to extend my appreciation to each of the witnesses for taking your time to be here today. It’s very important. These are—as we need to remind ourselves—this is an historic time and appointment, and these are very important issues that should not be neglected or overlooked because of the press of other activities. My own position is that I think, by virtue of her training, her ex- perience and her high achievement, Judge Sotomayor is very well qualified, all other things being equal. Unfortunately, because of her speeches and other public statements where she said ‘‘there’s no such thing as objectivity in the law’’, which the opposite of objec- tivity is subjectivity. She said there’s ‘‘no neutrality’’. If there’s no neutrality, then I guess all that leaves is bias. And it really strikes a body blow, I think, to the concept of equal justice under the law. Judges are not policymakers and judges should leave that job to the elected representatives of the people who reserve the time-hon- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00523 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 512 ored right to throw the rascals out if they don’t like what we’re doing as elected members of the legislative branch. So, you know, my concern is, what kind of judge would she be, if confirmed to the United States Supreme Court, the kind of judge that follows her speeches or the kind that follows the law? I just want to say to these firefighters what I told them earlier today when they were kind enough to come by my office. I think, you know, judges make mistakes. They used to say the only lawyer that hadn’t lost a case is one that hadn’t tried one. I don’t nec- essarily hold it so much against Judge Sotomayor that she didn’t rule your way in the case. Unfortunately, I think she did not give it the proper respect and pay it the sort of attention that she should, because there were real claims there that needed to be re- solved by a court. Every citizen is entitled to that, to have judges pay attention and not make mistakes by, you know, trying to sweep it under the rug. And thank goodness that Judge Cabranes found the case, because it almost slipped through the cracks, and then highlighted it so it could get to the Supreme Court of the United States and the Su- preme Court could address the very important issues that you’ve presented here. And one of the most important aspects, I think, of this hearing, is that it provides an opportunity—and it would not have been pro- vided, I think in large part, unless these firefighters had had the courage to do what they’ve done—for us to refocus our attention on some of these areas, as Chief Justice Roberts said. He said, ‘‘It’s sordid business, this divvying up by race.’’ And looking at people not as an individual human being, but as a member of a group or because of their sex, or their ethnicity, or their race. You know, it’s time for this Nation—I hope we would all agree—to look at every- one as individuals and to reward hard work, sacrifice, and initia- tive. The kinds of things that I think—particularly you, Frank and Ben have demonstrated. Frank is the lead plaintiff—but all the firefighters have helped demonstrate the importance of not divvying up by race, not using de facto quotas. And I think I would have felt a lot better if Judge Sotomayor had said, you know what? This is really an important issue and we should have addressed it. It slipped through our fingers, but thank goodness it was caught and it was ultimately reviewed. But she didn’t. I think the idea that the city could throw out a test just be- cause the outcome wasn’t what they wanted is really pretext for ra- cial discrimination. It’s to deny people what they are entitled to be- cause of the color of their skin. So I just want to ask, in the short time I have here, Mr. Vargas, I read earlier a statement that you had made to the New York Times about the reason why you’d gone through these five grueling years of litigation and the abuse that you’ve taken from people who tried to shame you out of standing on your rights and seeing this thing through. Could you just tell the Committee what sacrifices you have made, what your family has made, and why you felt like those sacrifices were so important to vindicate this important right? Mr. VARGAS. Well, let alone the financial sacrifice, but, you know, it—it starts from the moment you get out of the academy. I mean, VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00524 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 513 this was something that I wanted to do. I wanted to advance my career as a firefighter right through the ranks. And, you know, the books came with me to work every single day, you know, from the minute I graduated from the academy right up to when I got pro- moted to lieutenant, and they kept coming with me right on till I took the captain’s exam. And once I get promoted to captain, they’re going to continue to come with me until I go right up through the ranks, you know. It’s—it’s not something that, you know, you can lose sight of. You’ve got to continue to work hard and—and I want to instill that in my kids. I want them to see that and I want them to know that this is what America is all about. You work hard. This is how America was built. We’re the greatest country in the world because you—you—as I said before, you rise and fall on your own merits. Senator CORNYN. Do you hope for a day for your children in which, as we mentioned from Martin Luther King’s statement pre- viously, ‘‘they will be judged by the content of their character and not the color of their skin’’ ? Mr. VARGAS. I think our case goes a long way to help in—in as- suring that for them, and they’re going to benefit from this and I think we’re going in the right direction now. Senator CORNYN. I couldn’t agree more. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator CARDIN. Senator Kyl. Senator KYL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to all of you. One of the things that I think may have gotten lost in all of this is why tests are important. I particularly wanted to ask the two firefighters here, Mr. Ricci and Mr. Vargas, what difference does it make how well you perform on the test, whether you pass it or not? What’s the big deal? What do you real- ly have to show in those tests? And when you’re out performing your duties, what difference does it make whether you pass the test or not? Mr. Ricci, maybe start with you. Mr. RICCI. Thank you, Senator. It’s important to realize that over 100 firefighter die in the line of duty each year, an additional 80,000 are injured. You need to have a command of the knowledge in order to make command decisions. You need to understand the rules and regulations. Experience is the best teacher, but only a fool learns in that school alone. You have to have a basis to make the right decisions, because firefighters operate in all different types of environments. I’ve had the proud privilege of training the United States Marine Corps Seabird team, and they respond to an- thrax attacks in one of these buildings. I mean, firefighters have to be prepared for the regular house fire, to the car accident, to the hazardous material incident. You go to work every day and we’re like an insurance policy for the Amer- ican public that they hope they never have to use. But when some- one calls 911, within four to 5 minutes there’s a fully staffed fire company at your door, with no paperwork, and we’re there to an- swer the call. And when you show up, the officer has to be com- petent to lead his men and women of this fire service, career and volunteer, across the country to make the right decisions. Senator KYL. Thank you. That’s a great explanation. Lieutenant Vargas. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00525 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 514 Mr. VARGAS. There’s not much I can add to that. Senator KYL. That was pretty good. [Laughter.] Mr. VARGAS. That was pretty good, huh? Senator KYL. Well, I—I appreciate it, and I know that everybody here, regardless of party or position on the nominee or anything else, appreciates what you do and what your colleagues do, and I’m—I’m sure I speak for all of us in that regard. One of the things that I wanted to just say briefly, is that I— I am very proud of our—I was a lawyer and I practiced law and I—and I won some and I lost some. But I always had confidence in our system. And America is not unique, but there aren’t very many countries in the world like us where we willingly volunteer to put our—our fortunes, our freedom, in the event that we’re ac- cused of a crime, maybe even our life if there could be a death pen- alty involved, our careers, in the case of the suit that you all were involved in. We willing do that. And the way we do it is inter- esting. You all may not know this. The lawyers here certainly know it. When I filed a case in the U.S. District Court in Arizona, I didn’t know which judge I was going to get. There were about 10. There was one I hoped I didn’t get, but I knew the other nine, it didn’t matter. They would all ap- proach—they were Democrats, they were Republicans. But I didn’t know because it’s the next one in order and the lawyers don’t know the order, so it’s almost by lot. But we had confidence that we could put our client’s issue before the court and that justice would be done because that’s the way our system works. And over 220 years, the rule of law has been established in this country by judges ap- plying the law fairly and impartially. Over time, the precedents have been built up. And what struck me about what you all had—I’m talking about the two of you—to go through, is first of all, you were confronted with a judge who, in a very thorough decision, said ‘‘you lose’’. Then you appeal to the Second Circuit in a pro curium opinion, and you all know now what that is all too well. The court didn’t even write about it and said, ‘‘no, you lose again’’. Then the day that you got the results from the Supreme Court, just, what’s the difference between what you felt at the first situation and when you got the news about the Supreme Court, about your confidence in our sys- tem? Mr. VARGAS. I tried to say earlier that this is exactly how this country was built. This is why we’re so great, because, you know, you can work hard and you can go after the things that you want in this—in this country. And, you know, you’re going to be success- ful, you know, but you have to apply yourself. And those are the things that I tried to instill in—in my kids, and I’ll always put that forth. And I’ll speak with my accent so that they can see that it’s a great country, you know, and that’s why you need to work hard. Mr. RICCI. The price of democracy is vigilance, to be willing to participate—and the original feeling was, you know, we always— through our attorneys, always went back to that process and said, this is America. If we keep going forward, the process will work. That, at the end, to be able to look at my son and say, you know, I haven’t been there for you, but to look at him and say this is a— VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00526 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 515 this is an unbelievable civics lesson—lesson, that if you participate in democracy, that’s how it all works. And I thank you, Senator. Senator KYL. And I thank you. I hope that all of you will have confidence in our legal system in the future. Everybody here, again, regardless of position, will really stand in awe at a system which, in our country, year in and year out, has proved to be a very, very good system for our people. Thank you. Senator CARDIN. Well, Senator Kyl, I want to thank you for your questions and the responses. I think it was the right way for the record to reflect the end of this panel, which has been, I think, very, very helpful to us in the record on the confirmation process for Judge Sotomayor. I want to thank Chairman Leahy for allowing me to chair this panel. We’ve had a very distinguished panel, all eight of you, we thank you for being here. I particularly want to thank Mayor Bloomberg for taking the time to come from New York. I mention him because not only—does he do a great job as mayor, but he has had an important role at Johns Hopkins University and we very much appreciate that. And to Mr. Morgenthau, you are the model for the Nation in the District Attorney’s Office, and it’s—its a real honor to have you be- fore our Committee and we thank you for your energy and continu- ation in public service. And to Firefighter Ricci and to Lieutenant Vargas, I personally want to thank you for being here. You put a face on the issues. We—look at cases and we talk about the impact, but it affects real people, and real lives, and real families. I think you really have added to today’s hearing by your personal stories. Each one of us thank you for your public service, and we thank you for your belief in our Nation and for the testimony that you have given to this Committee. It’s been extremely helpful to each one of us on—the Judiciary Committee. And with that, we are going to take a 5-minute recess. When we return, Senator Klobuchar will be chairing the next panel. [Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the Committee was recessed.] After Recess [4:29 p.m.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. I think we are going to start our third panel here. If everyone could be seated. I will warn those of you out there, anyone that has asked David Cone to sign a baseball, you must ask all seven of our other panelists as well. We are going to start by getting sworn in. Would you please stand? Raise your right hand. Do you affirm that the testimony you are about to give before the committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Thank you. We are going to start. I will introduce each of you and then you will give your 5 minutes of testimony and then we will have ques- tions after that. We are going to start here with Mr. Freeh. Louis Freeh is the former Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation whose career in the Department of Justice began in 1975 when he became a special agent in the FBI. Mr. Freeh has a long and distinguished career as a public serv- ant under both Democratic and Republican Presidents. He was ap- pointed by President George H. W. Bush as a Federal District VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00527 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 516 Court judge on the Southern District of New York. He was also a career Federal prosecutor in the United States Attorney General’s Office for the Southern District of New York, serving as Chief of the Organized Crime Unit, Deputy United States attorney and As- sociate United States attorney. He graduated from Rutgers Law School and has an LOM degree in criminal law from New York University Law School. I look for- ward to your testimony, Mr. Freeh. STATEMENT OF LOUIS FREEH, FORMER DIRECTOR, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION Mr. FREEH. Thank you very much, Senator. Good afternoon, Sen- ator Sessions, good afternoon to you. It is a great privilege to be before the committee, the committee where I have appeared over 100 times and it is always a pleasure to be here. There are many friends on the committee who I have seen over the last few days. You have a prepared statement from me. As Sen- ator Sessions knows, I generally don’t read my opening statements which has gotten me in trouble with OMB over the years, but I thought it might be good just to talk and tell you why I’m here. I have had the privilege to work with great judges and a few peo- ple who are truly legendary judges. Let me just mention a couple. I served on the District Court with Constance Baker Motley who before she was a judge had those qualities of fairness and open- mindedness and commitment to the rule of law that I think we wish to see in our judges. The last case I tried as a judge was in the District of Minnesota before Judge Devitt. It was a case which by the way, Judge Ses- sions, Senator Sessions and I worked on together. He was the At- torney General of Alabama, great Attorney General, and I was an Assistant U.S. Attorney working on the case. It was the murder of a Federal judge. It was one of the few tragic times in our history when a Federal judge was murdered and the case was tried before Judge Devitt. Judge Devitt, who many of his peers said was the judge from central casting, was the model of judicial conduct and commitment. The jury instruction book, Devitt and Blackmun, was named after him. The Devitt Award, which is probably the most prestigious ju- dicial award, is named after him. He was actually one of my men- tors when I went on the Southern District bench. I was sworn in as FBI Director by Judge Frank Johnson, who as someone has mentioned here before, was a legendary judicial hero from Winston County, Alabama. He, together with a handful of other Republican judges, really changed the tide of history by their commitment to the law and to civil rights. Their fearlessness, hon- esty, and integrity with which they took office—an example to all judges. So it is my pleasure to recommend to the committee the con- firmation of this outstanding judge, Sonia Sotomayor. I want to talk a little bit about her judicial experience. I have been here or listening to these proceedings for the last few days. I think I may be the only lawyer who has actually been with her in a courtroom. Since in my view real life experience is the best indicator of what VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00528 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 517 a judge will do in the future—how they behaved, conducted, wrote and decided matters as a judge. As has been mentioned before, this candidate has an enormous and rich judicial record, 17 years, thousands of opinions, all the things that you want to look for as you make your evaluation. The process by which Judge Sotomayor comes here before you is quite extensive. You have the President and his reviewers, own in- vestigation, you have the Bar Associations, this committee. You have the FBI that conducted now three background investigations. I was actually Director when the second one was done. You have any and all information that has come from the public, from the citizens, Americans. You have reputational evidence from other judges, from lawyers who had appeared before her. My association with her began in 1992. She was a new judge on the Southern District and we had this tradition where the second newest judge would mentor the new judge. Some of us didn’t think it was the wisest rule to have, since I had about 9 months on the bench when she was entrusted to my care, so to speak. I actually sat with her in court and sat with her during trials. I helped review opinions that she asked me to look at. My law clerks were encamped with her law clerks. What I want to communicate to you in the very short period re- maining is Judge Sotomayor’s enormous judicial integrity and com- mitment to finding the facts, to being open minded, to being fair. She struggled and deliberated in making sure she had all the facts, making sure she had the right law, following the law and being the kind of judge that I think we would all be proud of. Speeches are important and it is great the way you all have con- sidered that so carefully, but when you enter the courtroom and you put the judicial robe on, just as you assume the authority when you take your committee, it is a whole different set of influences and immense power and influence that takes over. When Judge Sotomayor has been on the bench, what she has written, when she has argued, the way she has conducted herself, I think we can very safely predict this is going to be an outstanding judge with all the qualities that I know that you would want. So I urge you all to support her. Thank you very much. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Thank you for your testimony. Next we have Chuck Canterbury. Chuck Canterbury is the National President of the Fraternal Order of Police, one of the nation’s largest and most prominent voices for law enforcement of- ficers. Mr. Canterbury has served in numerous capacities in the organi- zation including national Vice President and national Second Vice President. He has 25 years of experience in law enforcement where he worked as a police officer in Horry County, South Carolina. Maybe you know Lindsey Graham, one of our members here. In only the best ways, I am sure. We look very much forward to your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Canterbury. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00529 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 518 STATEMENT OF CHUCK CANTERBURY, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE Mr. CANTERBURY. Thank you, Madam Chair, Ranking Member Sessions, Senator Hatch. It is a pleasure to be here today to offer the support of 327,000 rank and file police officers, my members in the Fraternal Order of Police. It is my pleasure to testify in support of the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the Supreme Court. Speaking as a law enforce- ment officer, I think it says a lot about the character of a young person who graduated from Yale and then accepted her first job as a poorly paid prosecutor in the District of Manhattan. Yet that is exactly what Judge Sotomayor did, as my members do in every city in America. She spent 5 years with that office, prosecuted many criminal cases, including a triple homicide and she forged an excellent work- ing relationship with the men and women working the beat in Manhattan. She earned their respect and a reputation as being tough, which in my profession is a compliment. As an appellate judge, she has participated in over 3,000 panel decisions and authored roughly 400 opinions, handling difficult issues of constitutional law, complex procedural matters and law- suits involving complicated business organizations. Some of her critics have pounced on a few of those decisions as well as some of the comments made during speaking engagements and have engaged in some pretty wild speculation as to what she would do as a Supreme Court Justice. As a law enforcement officer, I prefer to rely on evidence and fact and not speculation to reach those conclusions. One such area of speculation is on her feelings toward our right to bear arms as guaranteed by the Second Amendment. I want no mistake to be made. I take a back seat to no one in my reverence for the Second Amendment. In fact, if I thought that Judge Sotomayor’s presence on the court posed a threat to my Second Amendment rights, I would not be supporting her here today. The facts, as some have already pointed out, reflect a brilliant and thoughtful jurist respectful of the law and committed to its ap- propriate enforcement. Over the course of her career, she has analyzed each case on its merits. To me, that’s evidence of strong commitment to duty and to the law, two characteristics that we should expect from all of our judges. I want to cite a few cases which I’m familiar with because they deal with issues that every beat cop in the United States has dealt with. In the United States v. Fausto, an offender indicated on 242 counts relating to child pornography sought to have evidence against him thrown out because a search warrant that was sworn out lacked probable cause. Judge Sotomayor’s ruling held that the error was committed by the District Court issuing the warrant, not the officers who exe- cuted it. The conviction was upheld. In the United States v. Santa, she ruled that law enforcement of- ficers executing a search of a suspect based on an arrest warrant they believed to be active and valid should not result in the sup- pression of evidence even if that warrant had expired. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00530 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 519 In the United States v. Howard, she overturned the District Court’s decision to suppress evidence of drug trafficking by finding warrantless automobile searches to be constitutional. In the United States v. Clark, she held that the law enforcement officers did not violate the Fourth Amendment by asking to see the VIN plate under the hood of a vehicle after discovering that the VIN plate on the dashboard was missing. All of these rulings show that Judge Sotomayor got at least as much of her legal education from her 5 years as a prosecutor as she did at Yale Law School. These 5 years in my view reflect the same kind of commitment to the law that I have seen in the offi- cers that I represent. She has clearly demonstrated that she understands the fine line that police officers must walk and in her rulings reflect a working knowledge, not a theoretical knowledge, of the everyday realities of law enforcement work. After reviewing her record, I can say that Judge Sotomayor is a jurist in whom any beat cop could have confidence. It is for that reason that the National Executive Board of the FOP voted unani- mously to support her nomination and we urge you to as well. Thank you very much. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Mr. Canterbury. Next is David Cone. David Cone is a former major league baseball pitcher who over an 18-year career played for five teams in both the American and National Leagues. Mr. Cone won the American League Cy Young Award in 1994 and pitched a perfect game in 1999 as a member of the New York Yankees. He was a member of the Major League Baseball Player’s Association throughout his major league career and was an officer from 1994 through 2000. Thank you very much for being here, Mr. Cone. STATEMENT OF DAVID CONE, FORMER MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL PLAYER Mr. CONE. Thank you, Senator Klobuchar, Senator Sessions, Sen- ator Hatch. Nice to see you again. On behalf of all major league players both former and current, I greatly appreciate the opportunity to acknowledge the unique role that Judge Sonia Sotomayer played in preserving America’s pasttime. As you know, I am not a lawyer, much less a Supreme Court scholar. I was a professional baseball player from the time I was drafted out of high school in 1981 until the time I retired in 2003. I was also a union member and an officer of the Major League Baseball Players’ Association. As is well known, major league baseball has a long history of ac- rimonious labor relations. It was not until the 1970’s that players first gained the rights of free agency and salary arbitration. This meant that for the first time ever, players were able to earn what they were worth and have some choice about where they played. The next 20 years were quite difficult. There was a lockout or strike at the end of every contract. To the players, every dispute seemed to center on the owners’ desire to roll back free agency rights the players had won. But 1994 was the worst. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00531 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 520 The owners said that they wanted a salary cap and refused a promise that they would abide by the rules of the just expired con- tract after the season ended. We had no choice. The players went on strike in August 1994. I should note that this was before Congress passed the Curt Flood Act authored by Senators Hatch and Leahy which made it clear that baseball’s anti-trust exemption could not be used to un- dermine Federal law. In response, the owners canceled the remainder of the season which meant that there would be no World Series. Discussions con- tinued through the fall and the early winter but were fruitless. In December 1994, the owners unilaterally implemented a salary cap and imposed new rules and conditions of employment which would have made free agency virtually meaningless. They announced they would start the 1995 season with so-called replacement players instead of major leaguers. We did not think the owners were negotiating in good faith as they were required to do under Federal law. We went to the National Labor Relations Board. The board agreed with us and went to Federal court to seek an injunction against the owners’ unilateral changes. The United States district judge who drew the case was Judge Sotomayor. The rest is history, or at least baseball history. Judge Sotomayor found that the owners had engaged in bad faith bar- gaining. She issued an injunction. Her decision stopped the owners from imposing new work rules, ended our strike and got us all back on the field. The words she wrote cut right to the heart of the matter, and I quote: ‘This strike is about more than just whether the players and owners will resolve their differences. It is also about how the prin- ciples embodied by Federal law operate. This strike has placed the entire concept of collective bargaining on trial. Issuing an injunc- tion by opening day is important to ensure that the symbolic value of that day is not tainted by an unfair labor practice and the NLRB’s inability to take effective steps against its perpetuation.’ Judge Sotomayor grasped not only the complexity of the case, but its importance to our sport. Her decision was upheld by a unani- mous Court of Appeals panel comprised of judges appointed by dif- ferent Presidents from different parties with different judicial phi- losophies. On the day he announced her nomination, President Obama ob- served that some have said Judge Sotomayor saved baseball. Oth- ers may think this is an overstatement. But look at it this way. A lot of people, both inside and outside of baseball tried to settle the dispute. Presidents, special mediators, Secretaries of Labor, Mem- bers of Congress all tried to help but were not successful. With one decision, Judge Sotomayor changed the entire dispute. Her ruling rescued the 1995 baseball season and forced the par- ties to resume real negotiations. The negotiations were not easy, but ultimately were successful which in turn led to an improved re- lationship between the owners and the players. Today, baseball is currently enjoying a run of more than 14 years without interruption, a record that would have been inconceivable in the 1990’s. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00532 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 521 I believe all of us who love the game, players, owners and fans, are in her debt. If Judge Sotomayor is confirmed, I hope the rest of the country will realize as the players did in 1995 that it can be a good thing to have a judge or a Justice on the Supreme Court who recognizes that the law cannot always be separated from the realities involved in the disputes being decided. Thank you again and I would be glad to answer any questions you may have. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Mr. Cone. Our next witness is Kate Stith. She is the Lafayette S. Foster Professor of Law at Yale Law School where she teaches and writes in the areas of criminal law, criminal procedure and constitutional law. Previously Professor Stith was an Assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York where she prosecuted white collar and organized crime cases. After graduating from Harvard Law School, she clerked for Judge Carl McGowan of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia and for Associate Justice Byron White on the Supreme Court. Thank you for being here and we look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF KATE STITH, LAFAYETTE S. FOSTER PROFESSOR OF LAW, YALE LAW SCHOOL Professor STITH. I thank you, Senators, for the opportunity to comment on the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor whom I have known since she became a judge in 1992. As you noted before, I joined the faculty at Yale Law School in 1985. I was a Federal prosecutor in New York and I was also a Special Assistant at the Department of Justice in Washington. While a Federal prosecutor in New York, I had the pleasure of working with Louis Freeh. It is my judgment that this is an excep- tionally strong nomination. My judgment has nothing to do with Judge Sotomayor’s sex, ethnicity or personal story. I am judging her on the same criteria that I used when I was asked by the Yale Daily News some years ago whether Samuel Alito would be a strong nomination to the Supreme Court. I answered yes then and I answer yes now. Specifically I am confident that Sonia Sotomayor would serve this nation with powerful intelligence, vigor, rectitude and an abid- ing commitment to the Constitution. Moreover, her service as a state prosecutor and a District judge will make her unique on the court to which she will ascend. My views on her are informed by many sources. First, I have been unusually involved, at least for a professor, with members of the bar and bench within the Second Circuit. Among these lawyers and judges who know her best, she is held in the highest repute across the board. My views are also based on my many conversations with her. Among the most telling are those in which she has described the attributes she is looking for in pro- spective law clerks. Through these discussions over more than 15 years, I believe I gained insight into her view of the role of a judge. The bottom line is this. What she wants in her law clerks are the qualities we all want in a judge. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00533 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 522 She wants to make sure first that they are serious about the law and not about politics or professional opportunities after the clerk- ship. They must be serious about all areas of the law. For Judge Sotomayor, there are no favorite areas. Which brings me to a third quality she wants in her clerks. The prospective clerk must be willing to work his or her fingers to the bone if necessary in order to ensure that the opinions Judge Sotomayor writes and those she joins do not miss a relevant prece- dent and do not get a fact wrong. There is an overriding fourth quality that the judge considers critical. Is the prospective clerk willing to take criticism, work harder, and where appropriate rethink her initial assessment or his initial assessment of the issues? Over the years, the judge’s former clerks have told me time and again that they greatly appreciate her devoted commitment to the law, as a result of which they were held to higher standards and learned more than in any other time of their lives. Her conception of the role of a judge is borne out by her judicial opinions that I have read in the area of criminal law and proce- dure. On criminal procedure, let me just note that the usual categories of left and right do not easily apply. I would say that her decisions on the whole reflect more pragmatism and less formalism than those of, say, Justice Souter. Sometimes this cuts for the govern- ment, sometimes it cuts against it. I want to focus in particular on one substantive criminal law case, United States v. George decided in 2004. Judge Sotomayor’s unanimous 16-page opinion in that case concerns the meaning of the mens rea, term willfully in a Federal statute that makes it a crime to waillfully falsify a passport application. Her opinion makes clear that the role of the courts is not to de- termine what level of mens rea they think should apply, but what Congress intended when it wrote the word willfully. The opinion then embarks on an heroic effort to figure out what Congress meant in this particular statute. The opinion is so clari- fying and insightful that my co-authors and I decided to include a long excerpt from it in our forthcoming criminal law case book. But the significance of the case isn’t only that it is an excellent opinion. It also resulted from the willingness of Judge Sotomayor and two colleagues to reconsider their initial decision when addi- tional arguments were brought to their attention, even though this meant that a different party would prevail. Their aim was neither to affirm the conviction nor to reverse the conviction, but to find the best resolution of the complex and con- flicting precedents on this mens rea issue. In conclusion, I submit that Judge Sotomayor’s opinion in the George case reveals four judicial qualities that she clearly pos- sesses. First, she cared deeply about the issue at hand, no matter how minor or word parsing it may seem even to lawyers. Second, she was willing to reassess her initial judgment and dig deeper. Third, her legal analysis was exceptionally clear and astute. Fourth, she had no agenda other than trying to get the law right, VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00534 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 523 and in a society committed to the rule of law, trying to get the law right is what it means to be fair and impartial. This is a great judge. I urge you to vote in favor of her confirma- tion. Thank you, Senators. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. We next have Dr. Charmaine Yoest who is the President and CEO of Americans United for Life, the first national pro-life organization in the nation whose legal strategists have been involved in every pro-life case be- fore the United States Supreme Court since Roe v. Wade. Dr. Yoest began her career in the White House during the Reagan administration. She has also worked as the Project Direc- tor of the Family Gender and Tenure Project at the University of Virginia and as a Vice President at the Family Research Council. Welcome, Dr. Yoest. We look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF DR. CHARMAINE YOEST, AMERICANS UNITED FOR LIFE Dr. YOEST. Thank you very much, Senator Klobuchar, Ranking Member Sessions and members of the committee for inviting me to testify before you today. As you said, I am here on behalf of Americans United for Life, and we are the nation’s oldest pro-life legal organization. Our vi- sion at AUL is a nation where everyone is welcomed in life and protected in law. We have been committed to defending human life through vig- orous judicial legislative and educational efforts since 1971 and we have been involved in every abortion related case before the United States Supreme Court beginning with Roe v. Wade. I am here today because of AUL’s deep concern about the nomi- nation of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to the United States Supreme Court. A vote to confirm Judge Sotomayor to our highest court is a vote for unrestricted abortion on demand and a move toward ele- vating abortion as a fundamental right equal to our freedom of reli- gion and freedom of speech. A nominee’s judicial philosophy goes to the heart of his or her qualifications to serve on the United States Supreme Court. Based on Judge Sotomayor’s record of prior statements combined with her over a decade-long service on the board of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, Judge Sotomayor’s judicial philos- ophy makes her unqualified to serve on the Supreme Court. When judges fail to respect their limited role under our Constitu- tion by imposing their personal preferences regarding public policy through their decisions, our entire judicial system of equal justice under the law is corrupted. In a series of speeches as we have heard chronicled here this week, Judge Sotomayor has indicated a troubling willingness to cel- ebrate her own personal preferences and characteristics. Several references have been made during this hearing to the judge’s 2001 wise Latina speech. I would note that in that very same speech she stated that ‘personal experiences affect the facts that judges choose to see.’ Not just what they do see, but what they choose to see. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00535 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 524 Of even greater concern, Judge Sotomayor stated in the same lec- ture that ‘the aspiration to impartiality is just that. It is an aspira- tion.’ However, impartiality is not merely an aspiration. Impartiality is a discipline and its necessity is enshrined in the judicial oath. A judge who injects personal experiences into a decision corrupts the very foundations of our judicial system. Perhaps the clearest example of Judge Sotomayor’s problematic philosophy is her April 2009 speech in which she said, ‘Ideas have no boundaries. Ideas are what set our creative juices flowing. Ideas are ideas and whatever their source, if it persuades you then you are going to adopt its reasoning.’ We see her here building a case for judicial activism, yet cre- ativity is the approach Americans want least from a judge. A judge who approaches the bench seeking to ‘implement ideas’ is an activ- ist judge by definition. The laboratories of democracy in our system should remain firm- ly lodged in the state legislatures, not preempted from the court. These troubling speeches did not occur in isolation. Looking at the totality of the judge’s record must include her 12 years of serv- ice on the board of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund. During that time, the organization filed not one, but six ami- cus briefs in five-abortion related cases before the Supreme Court. Given her particular emphasis on personal viewpoint in jurispru- dence, we believe these cases become uniquely relevant in pro- viding insight into her judicial philosophy. Judge Sotomayor served the fund as a member and vice presi- dent of the board of directors and also as chairperson of the Edu- cation and Litigation Committees and has been described as an in- volved and ardent supporter of their various legal efforts. What then does her tenure with the organization tell us about her judicial philosophy? The Fund briefs consistently argued the position that abortion is a fundamental right, expressing hostility to any regulation of abortion, including parental notification, in- formed consent and bans on partial birth abortion. For example, in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, the Fund com- pared abortion to the First Amendment right to free speech and ar- gued that any burden on the right to abortion was unconstitu- tional. In Ohio v. Akron and Casey, the Fund asked the court to strike down parental involvement statutes insisting that minors should be ‘protected against parental involvement that might prevent or instruct the exercise of their right to choose.’ In Williams v. Zbaraz, the Fund argued that failure to publicly fund abortions was discriminatory. In Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the Fund argued against, against a requirement that physicians personally counsel patients. They even argued in Webster that strict scrutiny is required because of the preciousness of the fundamental right to abortion, underscoring not just a will- ingness to engage in creative jurisprudence, but an ideological com- mitment to advancing an extremist abortion agenda. In conclusion, I would like to end on a personal note related to the Fund briefs. We have heard quite a bit about settled versus un- settled this week, and the one thing we do know, that as we have VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00536 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 525 seen this week, this country is still very unsettled about abortion doctrine. However, among the American people there are some elements of abortion related policy that absolutely do provide common ground. Preeminent among these is a core American belief in the bonds between parent and child. I have five children and the notion that my daughters might be taken for a surgical procedure without my knowledge is horrific. This common sense commitment to protect our children is over- whelmingly shared among all of those who identify themselves as pro-life and pro-choice, and yet it is precisely these kinds of com- mon sense policies like parental notification that are threatened by this nomination. In the Fund’s brief in Ohio v. Akron, they argued that ‘the court would also need to consider whether the state through giving the parents confidential information has enhanced these parents’ abil- ity to indoctrinate, control or punish their minor daughters who choose abortion.’ This is a viewpoint far outside the mainstream of American pub- lic opinion and it points to another truth about the Fund argu- ments in their world view which the evidence indicates Judge Sotomayor shares. While arguing to promote abortion to a funda- mental right equivalent to the freedom of religion or speech, they actually wish to elevate it even further, placing it singularly alone among rights beyond the reach of the American public to regulate or even debate. Thank you very much. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Next we have Sandy Froman. Sandy Froman is the Past President of the National Rifle Association of America. Ms. Froman is also currently a member of the NRA Board of Directors where she has served since 1992 and in 2007 was unanimously elected to a lifetime appointment on the NRA Council. A graduate of Stanford University and Harvard Law School, Ms. Froman is a practicing attorney and speaks and writes regularly on the Second Amendment. Welcome to the committee, we look for- ward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF SANDY FROMAN, ESQ., ATTORNEY, GUN RIGHTS ADVOCATE, AND FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE NA- TIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION Ms. FROMAN. Thank you, Madam Chair. Chairman Leahy, Rank- ing Member Sessions, Senator Hatch, thank you for the oppor- tunity to appear before this committee today to comment on the nomination of Sonia Sotomayor as it relates to her views on the Second Amendment. It is critical that a Supreme Court Justice understand and appre- ciate the origin and meaning of the right of the people to keep and bear arms, a right exercised and valued by almost 90 million Amer- ican gun owners. Yet Judge Sotomayor’s record on the Second Amendment and her unwillingness or inability to engage in any meaningful analysis of this enumerated right when twice given the opportunity to do so suggests either a lack of understanding of Second Amendment ju- risprudence or hostility to the right. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00537 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 526 In 2004, Judge Sotomayor and two colleagues in U.S. v. Sanchez Villar discussed the Second Amendment claim in a one-sentence footnote holding without any analysis that the right to possess a gun is clearly not a fundamental right. Judge Sotomayor reiterated her view earlier this year as par of a panel in Maloney v. Cuomo holding that the Second Amendment is not a fundamental right, does not apply to the states and that if an object is designed primarily as a weapon, that is a sufficient basis for total prohibition even in the home. The Maloney court ignored directives and precedent from the Su- preme Court in last year’s landmark case, District of Columbia v. Heller which held that the Second Amendment guarantees to all law abiding, responsible citizens the individual right to arms, par- ticularly for self-defense. Although the Supreme Court in Heller warned against applying the Supreme Court incorporation cases from the late 1800’s with- out conducting a proper Fourteenth Amendment inquiry, Judge Sotomayor’s panel in Maloney did just that. They cited the 1886 case of Presser v. Illinois decided under the Privileges or Immunities Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment for the position that the Second Amendment does not limit the states and they ignored the Supreme Court’s 2008 directive to conduct a Fourteenth Amendment analysis under the modern doctrine of the Due Process Clause to determine if the right is fundamental and should be incorporated. By contrast, the Ninth Circuit in Nordyke v. King when faced with the same incorporation question earlier this year did follow the Supreme Court’s directive and correctly concluded that the Sec- ond Amendment is a fundamental right and does apply to the states through the Due Process Clause. Our Second Amendment rights are no less deserving of protec- tion against states and local governments than the First, Fourth and Fifth Amendments, all of which have been incorporated. When faced with the most important question remaining after Heller, whether the right to keep and bear arms is fundamental and applies to the states, Judge Sotomayor dismissed the issue with no substantive analysis. She and her colleagues also failed to follow Supreme Court prece- dent when they held that the New York statute could be upheld if the government had a rational basis for the law. They ignored that the Supreme Court in Heller rejected the rational basis test for Second Amendment claims. By failing to conduct a proper Fourteenth Amendment analysis, the Maloney court evaded its judicial responsibilities, offered no guidance to lower courts and provided no assistance in framing the issue for resolution by the Supreme Court. Whenever an appellate judge fails to provide supporting analysis for their conclusion or address serious constitutional issues pre- sented by the case, it is legitimate to ask whether the judge reached that conclusion by application of the Constitution and stat- utes or based on a political or social agenda. Judge Sotomayor’s view robs the Second Amendment of any real meaning. Under her view, the city of New Orleans’ door-to-door VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00538 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 527 confiscation of firearms from law-abiding peaceable citizens in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina was constitutional. Preventing an individual from exercising what the Heller court said was the Second Amendment’s core lawful purpose of self-de- fense is no less dangerous when accomplished by a state law than by a Federal law. The Second Amendment survives today by a single vote in the Supreme Court. Both its application to the states and whether there will be a meaningfully strict standard of review remain to be decided. Judge Sotomayor has already revealed her views and they are contrary to the text, history and meaning of the Second and Four- teenth Amendments. As a Circuit Court judge, she is constrained by precedent. But as a Supreme Court Justice appointed for life, she would be making precedent. A super majority of Americans believe in an individual personal right to arms. They deserve a Justice who will interpret the Second Amendment in a fair and impartial manner and write well crafted opinions worthy of respect from those of us who must live by their decisions. The President who nominated Judge Sotomayor has expressed support for the city of Chicago’s gun ban which is being challenged in NRA v. Chicago, a case headed to the Supreme Court. Seating a Justice on the Supreme Court who does not treat the Second Amendment as a fundamental right deserving of protection against cities and states could do far more damage to the right to keep and bear arms than any legislation passed by Congress. Thank you. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much for your testimony, Ms. Froman. Our next witness is David Kopel. He is currently the Research Director of the Independence Institute in Golden, Colorado and an Associate Policy Analyst at the CATO Institute. He is also a contributor to the National Review Magazine. He graduated from the University of Michigan Law School. Thank you very much for being here. We look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF DAVID KOPEL, ESQ., INDEPENDENCE INSTITUTE Mr. KOPEL. The case of Sonia Sotomayor v. the Second Amend- ment is not yet found in the record of Supreme Court decisions. Yet if Judge Sotomayor is confirmed to the Supreme Court, the opin- ions of the newest Justice may soon begin to tell the story of a Jus- tice with disregard for the exercise of constitutional rights by tens of millions of Americans. New York state is the only state in the union which completely prohibits the peaceful possession of nunchaku, a xenophobic ban enacted after the opening to China in the early 1970s after the growth of interest in martial arts. In a colloquy with Senator Hatch on July 14, Judge Sotomayor said that there was a rational basis for the ban because nunchaku could injure or kill someone. The same point could just as accu- rately be made about bows and arrows, swords or guns. All of them VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00539 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 528 are weapons and all of them can be used for sporting purposes or for legitimate self-defense. Judge Sotomayor’s approach would allow states to ban archery equipment with no more basis than declaring the obvious, that bows are weapons. Even if there were no issue of fundamental rights in this case, Judge Sotomayor’s application of the rational basis test was shallow and insufficiently reasoned and it was con- trary to Supreme Court precedent showing that the rational basis test is supposed to involve a genuine inquiry, not a mere repetition of a few statements made by prejudice people who impose the law. The plaintiff in Maloney had argued that even putting aside the Second Amendment, the New York prohibition violated his rights under the Fourteenth Amendment. There was no controlling prece- dent on whether Mr. Maloney’s activity involved an unenumerated right protected by the Fourteenth Amendment. Accordingly, Judge Sotomayor and her fellow Maloney panelists should have provided a reasoned decision on the issue. Yet Judge Sotomayor simply presumed with no legal reasoning that Mr. Maloney’s use of arms in his own home was not part of the exercise of a fundamental right. Testifying before this committee on July 14, Judge Sotomayor provided further examples of her troubling attitude to the right to arms. She told Senator Hatch that the Heller decision had author- ized gun control laws which could pass the rational basis test. To the contrary, the Heller decision had explicitly rejected the weak standard of review which Justice had argued for in his dis- sent. Both Judge Sotomayor and some of her advocates have pointed to the Seventh Circuit’s decision in NRA v. Chicago as retrospec- tively validating her actions in Maloney. The argument is unpersuasive. Both the Maloney and the NRA courts cited 19th century precedents which had said that the Fourteenth Amend- ment’s ‘‘privileges or immunities’’ clause did not make the Second Amendment enforceable against the States. However, as the Heller decision itself had pointed out, those cases ‘‘did not engage in the sort of 14th Amendment inquiry re- quired by our later cases.’’ In particular, the later cases require an analysis under a sepa- rate provision of the 14th Amendment, the Due Process clause. No- tably, the Seventh Circuit addressed this very issue and provided a detailed argument for why the existence of modern incorporation under the Due Process clause would not change the result in the case at bar. In contrast, Judge Sotomayor’s per curiam opinion in Maloney did not even acknowledge the existence of the issue. Various advocates have made the argument that since Maloney and NRA reached the same result, and since two of the judges in NRA v. Chicago were Republican appointees who were often called ‘‘conservatives,’’ then the Maloney opinion must be all right. This argument is valid only if one presumes that conservatives and/or Republican appointees always meet the standard of strong protec- tiveness for constitutional rights which should be required for any Supreme Court nominee. In the case of the NRA v. Chicago judges, that standard was plainly not met. The Seventh Circuit judges actually made the pol- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00540 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 529 icy argument that the Second Amendment should not be incor- porated because incorporation would prevent states from outlawing self-defense by people who are attacked in their own homes. A wise judge demonstrates and builds respect for the rule of law by writing opinions which carefully examine the relevant legal issues, and which provide careful written explanations for the judge’s decisions on those issues. Judge Sotomayor’s record on arms rights cases has been the opposite. Her glib and dismissive attitude toward the right is manifest in her decisions and has been further demonstrated by her testimony before this Committee. In Sonia Sotomayor’s America, the peaceful citizens who possess firearms, bows, or martial arts instruments have no rights which a State is bound to respect, and those citizens are not even worthy of a seri- ous explanation as to why. Thank you. [The prepared statement of Mr. Kopel appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. And did I say your name correctly? Oh, well, that was good. Thank you. Next we have Ilya Somin, and Professor Somin is an assistant professor at George Mason University School of Law. His research focuses on constitutional law, property law, and the study of pop- ular political participation and its implications for constitutional democracy. He currently serves as co-editor of the Supreme Court Economic Review, one of the country’s top-rated law and economic journals. After receiving his M.A. in Political Science from Harvard University and his law degree from Yale Law School, Professor Somin clerked for Judge Jerry E. Smith of the U.S. Court of Ap- peals for the Fifth Circuit. I look forward to your testimony, Mr. Somin. Thank you for being here. STATEMENT OF ILYA SOMIN, PROFESSOR, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW Mr. SOMIN. Thank you very much. I would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity to testify and, even more impor- tantly, for your interest in the issue of constitutional property rights that I will be speaking about. For the Founding Fathers, the protection of private property was one of the most important rea- sons for the establishment of the Constitution in the first place. As President Barack Obama has written, ‘‘Our Constitution places the ownership of private property at the very heart of our system of liberty.’’ Unfortunately, the Supreme Court and other Federal courts have often given private property rights short shrift and have denied them the sort of protection that is routinely extended to other con- stitutional rights. I hope the Committee’s interest in this issue will over time help begin to change that. In my oral testimony today, I will consider Judge Sotomayor’s best property rights decision, Didden v. Village of Port Chester. In my written testimony, which I hope will be entered into the record, I also discuss her decision in Krimstock v. Kelly. The important background to the Didden decision is the Supreme Court’s 2005 decision in the case of Kelo v. city of New London, VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00541 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 530 which addressed the Fifth Amendment’s requirement that private property can only be taken by the Government for a public use. Unfortunately, a closely divided 5–4 Supreme Court ruled in Kelo that it is permissible to take property from one private individual and give it to another solely for purposes of promoting economic de- velopment, even if there is not any evidence that the promised de- velopment will actually occur. This licensed numerous abusive takings in many parts of the country. Indeed, since World War II, economic development and other similar takings have displaced hundreds of thousands of peo- ple, many of them poor or ethnic minorities. But as broad as the Kelo decision was in upholding a wide range of abusive takings, Judge Sotomayor’s decision in the Didden case went even further than Kelo in doing so. The facts of Didden are as follows: In 1999, the village of Port Chester in New York declared a redevelopment area in part of its territory where, therefore, property could be taken by eminent do- main in order to promote development. And they also appointed a person named Gregg Wasser, a powerful developer, as the main de- veloper for the area. In 2003, Bart Didden and Dominick Bologna, two property own- ers in the area, approached the village for permission to build a CVS on their property, and they were directed by Mr. Wasser— they were directed to Mr. Wasser, who told them that they must either pay him $800,000 or give him a 50-percent stake in their business. Otherwise, he threatened he would have the village con- demn their property. When they refused his demands, the property was condemned almost immediately after that. Now, in her decision with two other members of the Second Cir- cuit, the panel that Judge Sotomayor was on upheld this con- demnation in a very short, cursory summary order that included almost no analysis. And though it is true that they cited the Kelo decision, they made no mention of the fact that Kelo actually stated that pretextual takings are still forbidden under the Constitution— pretextual takings being defined as takings where the official ra- tionale for the condemnation was merely a pretext for a plan to benefit a powerful private party of some sort. There is some controversy over what counts as a pretextual tak- ing and what does not. But if anything does count as a pretextual taking, it is surely a case like Didden, where essentially the prop- erty would not have been condemned but for the owner’s refusal to pay a private party $800,000. Surely, if anything is a pretextual taking, it is a case where property is condemned as part of a scheme for leverage to enable a private individual to extort money from the owners. In her oral testimony before this Committee, Judge Sotomayor said that her decision was based in part on a belief that the prop- erty owners had filed their case too late. I think the important thing to remember about this statement is that in her own deci- sion, she actually specifically wrote that she would have ruled the same way ‘‘even if the appellant’s claims were not time-barred.’’ So she claimed that even regardless of when they filed their case, she would have come out the same way. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00542 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 531 Moreover, as I discuss in my written testimony, her statute of limitations holding was entirely dependent on the substantive property rights holding as well, and I can discuss that further in questions if the Senators are interested. I think the bottom line about this case is its extreme nature. If one is not willing to strike down a condemnation in a situation like this; if one is not willing to say that this is not a public use, it is not clear that there are any limits whatsoever on the Government’s ability to take private property for the benefit of politically power- ful individuals. And on that note, I am happy to conclude, and I thank you very much for the opportunity to testify. [The prepared statement of Mr. Somin appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much for your testimony. We are not going to have each Senator ask 5 minutes of ques- tions, and I will start with Director Freeh. You are the only pan- elist who has had the opportunity to sit with Judge Sotomayor as a fellow judge. What did you learn about her and her approach to judging that led you to endorse her? Mr. FREEH. You know, I think all the qualities that we have heard in this hearing as the optimal qualities—mainstream, fair- mindedness, preparedness, integrity, knowledge and intellect, pa- tience, part of being a good judge is listening and making sure that the parties are all heard, and really, you know, her sense of com- mitment to getting all the facts and then applying the law. As you said, Senator, I not only served with her but actually was with her in court, as I mentioned in my opening statement. As we say, I ‘‘second-sat’’ her in a number of her first trials where I actu- ally observed her entire conduct of the trial, preparation, motion practice, instruction to juries, how she treated witnesses. And I think of all the things I observed over a 6-month period was really, you know, how detailed she was in preparing a written opinion. So this was never a judge that had a predisposition or a pre-no- tion or a personal agenda, but struggled and committed a lot of time and effort to getting the facts and applying the law. And I think she did that as a brand-new judge. She has done it for 17 years. And I think we can be assured she will do it as a Justice. Senator KLOBUCHAR. As someone who was appointed by Presi- dent George H.W. Bush, do you have any reservations about her ability to be a Supreme Court Justice without activism or an ideo- logical agenda? Mr. FREEH. No, I am totally confident that this would be an out- standing judge, and whether it was President Obama or someone else, as you mentioned, Judge Sotomayor was first appointed by George Bush, the first George Bush. I was also. You know, I think she has all of the mainstream, moderate, restrained adherence to the law qualities that we want, and I think we are going to be very proud of her. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. Mr. Canterbury, you spent more than 25 years as an active-duty police officer in South Carolina. I know what a difficult job you had. From my previous job, I have been able to see it firsthand. Are you confident that, if confirmed, Judge Sotomayor has the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00543 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 532 background and judicial record to be a Justice who will be mindful of the need for law enforcement to protect our Nation and have a pragmatic view of law enforcement issues? Mr. CANTERBURY. We are very confident of that. Based on the over 450 criminal cases that we reviewed, we felt that her judg- ment was fair, tough, and balanced. Throughout all of the cases that we reviewed, and looking at the totality of her career, we feel very comfortable that she will make a fine judge. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Just as I said Mr. Freeh was the only one on the panel that served with Judge Sotomayor, Mr. Cone, you are the only one on the panel that has pitched a perfect game, as far as I know. Did you believe her to be fair when she ended the baseball strike? I have to tell you that I thought your testimony—people have for 4 days now talked about each specific case and questioned a lot on different cases and were very thorough in their questioning and their understanding. But I thought you so succinctly described the effect that her ruling had on many, many people across this coun- try. And what do you think that this decision says a little more broadly about her approach to law in general and the impact of her judicial philosophy on the lives of individual Americans? Mr. CONE. Well, thank you, Senator. You know, from my perspec- tive, as I said in my statement, a lot of people tried to end that dispute, including President Clinton—we were called to the White House—special mediators, Members of Congress. I spent weeks on end here in Washington lobbying Congress on trying to get a par- tial repeal of the antitrust exemption, which did happen, and Sen- ator Hatch and Senator Leahy certainly sponsored that bill, the Curt Flood Act, which I think had an enormous impact as well. But Judge Sotomayor is the one who made the tough, courageous call that put the baseball players back on the field. You know, from my perspective as a union member, we felt that we were in trouble, that the game was in trouble. It was to the point of almost being irreparably damaged. And she made the courageous decision to put the game back on the field and get the two parties back to the bar- gaining table and negotiating in good faith. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Madam Chairman. It is good to be with you, and we are glad you are on this Committee. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Cone, I was reading a story about statis- tical stuff the other day. It came to me that, you know, if you throw a coin, it can land five times in a row on heads. And so I wonder about that a little bit in an effort to have racial harmony on test taking, because sometimes it is just statistically so, which makes me think there is no way the American League could have won— what? –12 out of the last 13 All-Star Games. Mr. CONE. It makes you wonder, yes. Senator SESSIONS. Two or three is about all they are worth, right? Thank you for your testimony. We have enjoyed it. Judge Freeh, nice to see you. I value your testimony, always do, and I appreciate it very much. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00544 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 533 I would note, I think you would agree with me, but former Presi- dent Bush, former former President Bush nominated Judge Sotomayor as Senator Moynihan’s pick. In other words, they had a little deal that President Bush would appoint three judges, I think, and Senator Moynihan would get to pick one, and he nomi- nated the recommendation of Senator Moynihan. Is that the way you remember it? Mr. FREEH. I think that is correct, but I also think he is sup- porting this nomination now. Senator SESSIONS. Okay. That is a good comment. You did good. Ms. Stith, thank you for your very insightful comments. I appre- ciated that very much, and it is valuable to us. Dr. Yoest, I was thinking about this organization, Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, PRLDEF, and do board mem- bers of your organization know what lawsuits you are pursuing and generally what the issues are? Ms. YOEST. Thank you for that question, Senator. Senator SESSIONS. Push your button. Ms. YOEST. I was asked that question, actually, right after Judge Sotomayor was nominated, and it was the day before my board came to town for one of our annual meetings. And as I have lis- tened to the discussion of her relationship with the fund as a board member, I have found the connection between her association with the cases and her description to really strain credulity. The fact of the matter is you don’t have to have read an indi- vidual case or reviewed a particular point as a board member to be intimately associated with it. The point of being a board mem- ber for all of us who have dedicated our lives to the nonprofit realm is to have oversight and to have accountability and responsibility for the organization. And so I think it is—— Senator SESSIONS. Well, I think that is probably—most boards should operate that way, at least. Ms. Froman, is it correct to say that Judge Sotomayor’s opinion in Maloney, which said the Second Amendment does not apply to the States, if it is not overruled and if it is followed by the United States Supreme Court, then basically the Second Amendment rights are eviscerated, with regard to cities and States they could eliminate firearms? Ms. FROMAN. That is correct, Senator. The problem is the Heller case did not have to deal with the incorporation issue because it took place in Washington, D.C., which is a Federal enclave and Federal law applies directly. But if the Second Circuit decision or the Seventh Circuit decision remains law, is approved by the Su- preme Court, goes up the Supreme Court and is affirmed, then, yes, cities and States can ban guns. Senator SESSIONS. Does it worry you that the judge who has al- ready ruled on the case one way, and it was a 5:4 case before, now could be deciding—being the deciding vote on how that might turn out? Ms. FROMAN. It is of great concern to me, Senator, and that is why I am here today to testify. And it is of particular concern to me today because she did not give any reason, she did not explain what the basis was for her holding. It is kind of like when I was in math class, it was not enough to get the right answer. You had VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00545 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 534 to show your work so that the professor knew that you actually worked the problem and you did not cheat. So, you know, without any explanation of how she reached her conclusions, we cannot tell whether that was a legitimate applica- tion of the Constitution and the statute. Senator SESSIONS. I know your organization officially—I see today they said they wanted to see how the hearings went and what the nominee said. After that, has the National Rifle Associa- tion now made an announcement today, and what is it? Ms. FROMAN. Well, I, of course, have been here today, and I am not here to speak on behalf of the NRA. I am here to speak on my own behalf and, of course, on behalf of other American gun owners. The NRA is the oldest and largest civil rights organization in the history of this country. They are dedicated to preserving and pro- tecting the Second Amendment. And I think they have been out every day talking about the concerns that the NRA has over Judge Sotomayor’s record. Senator SESSIONS. Are you aware that—I was just given a docu- ment here that said that, ‘‘Therefore, the National Rifle Association opposes the confirmation of Judge Sotomayor.’’ Were you aware that that had happened? Ms. FROMAN. I was told about that while I was here, Senator, yes. Senator SESSIONS. Okay. Ms. FROMAN. And so I am sure that they have given a full expla- nation of that position, and I am glad to see that. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Somin, thank you for your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Kopel, for yours. And I frankly feel now obligated to look more closely at the Didden case. You raised more serious concerns than I realized. In fact, I guess I was thinking this is worse than I thought after hearing your testimony. I do think that it does impact the property rights of great importance, and thank you for sharing that. If you want to make a brief comment, my time is—— Mr. SOMIN. Yes, thank you, Senator. I agree with you it raises very important concerns and that these sorts of takings affect thou- sands of people around the country, particularly the poor and mi- norities, as the NAACP pointed out in their amicus brief in the Kelo case where they indicated that the poor and politically vulner- able and ethnic minorities tend to be targeted for these sorts of condemnations. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Senator Kyl. Senator KYL. Thank you, Madam Chairman. First of all, let me acknowledge those on the panel who I know, but I thank all of you for being here. Louis Freeh, it is great to see you again. I respect your opinions greatly. I want you to know that. I also respected the way David Cone played baseball very, very much. And I used to root for you, as a matter of fact. I should not say that as an Arizona Diamondbacks fan, but I had another team in the other league. Senator SESSIONS. Senator Bunning’s record, was his perfect game the last one when you did it? VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00546 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 535 Mr. CONE. No. His was done back in the 1960’s, but there are only, I think, 17 perfect games in the history of the game. I am lucky enough to be one of them. Senator KYL. And, of course, Dr. Yoest; and Sandy Froman is a person with whom I have consulted over many, many years, long before she was the National President of the NRA, but also on legal matters. And I appreciate her because of her distinguished law ca- reer, the judgment that she gives on this. I wish I could ask all of you a question, but let me just ask a couple here. First of all, Sandy, the question that Senator Sessions asked I think gets right to the heart of the matter, and I wonder if you could just put a little bit of a legal spin to it. The question is: What would it mean to the gun owners of America if Judge Sotomayor’s opinion were to be the controlling law in this country from now on? She acknowledged under my questioning that it would be more difficult—I do not have her exact quotation here, but it would be more difficult for gun owners to challenge the regulations of states or cities, but it was unclear exactly how much more. Could you describe the test that would be used in such a situa- tion and, in your opinion, how much more difficult it would be for gun owners to sustain their rights as against States and localities? Ms. FROMAN. Yes, thank you, Senator Kyl. Well, I believe I heard you questioning one of the panels earlier. You raised that issue yourself, which is she said the rational basis test would be suffi- cient to sustain any gun ban that the Government wanted to im- pose, whether it was a city or a state. And the rational basis test is the lowest threshold that the Government has to meet to sustain a ban. They can articulate any reason, pretty much, and it will be sufficient to get past that review. Now, the Supreme Court in Heller made it clear that the rational basis test is not allowed when you are interpreting an enumerated right like the Second Amendment. But she ignored that in the Maloney case and talked about rational basis anyway. So that is of great concern to me and I think to the almost 90 million Amer- ican gun owners that, yes, it is fine to say in Heller that we have a right that is protected against infringement by the Federal Gov- ernment. But that doesn’t mean—the Heller case doesn’t mean that cities and states cannot ban guns, cannot issue whatever regula- tions they want, as long as they can articulate what will meet this rational basis test. It is a very, very low threshold. And as a matter of fact, that is why the District of Columbia had their gun ban. That is why the city of Chicago basically has a gun ban that prevents people from having firearms even in their home for self-defense. So that is what we are concerned about as gun owners in Amer- ica. Senator KYL. Thank you very much. Dr. Yoest, in the questions by Senator Coburn of the nominee, he asked about advances in technology, and as I recall Judge Sotomayor’s testimony, she did not want to acknowledge the impact of advances in technology as it relates to the Supreme Court’s eval- uation of restrictions on abortion. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00547 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 536 Do you believe that advances in technology are important to the viability trimester framework that the Court articulated in Roe, and why? Ms. YOEST. Well, I would reference back to the confirmation hearings of the Chief Justice in which he went through one of the elements that we look at when we reconsider factual—how things relate to a case, and there has definitely been tremendous advances on the scientific realm as it relates to human life. So I think it is important to see her, whether or not she is will- ing to consider that kind of thing, and it also goes to—Americans United for Life works very focused on pro-life legislation at the State level, and part of the challenge that we face is this question of how much the American people are going to be allowed to inter- act with their duly elected representatives at the State level in re- stricting abortion in a common-sense way that they would like to see. Senator KYL. Thank you. Just to be clear, I have recalled her tes- timony slightly incorrectly. She actually did not say or would not say how she viewed it. She said it would depend upon the case that came before her. So I do not want to mischaracterize her testimony, but your point is that it would be very important for a court in evaluating a restriction imposed by a State. Ms. YOEST. Yes, sir. Senator KYL. Okay. Thank you. Again, I wish I had more time to—but we have, I think, one or two panels left here, so we should probably move on. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Senator, we have two panels left. Senator KYL. Yes, but we thank you very much. This is an im- portant event in our country’s history. You have contributed to it, and we thank you, all of you, for it. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. Canterbury. I appreciate the FOP’s—— Senator KLOBUCHAR. Yes, I want to thank all of you, and you just did a marvelous job in stating your opinions. I think it was helpful for everyone, and thank you very much. Have a very good afternoon. It was one of our shortest panels. You are lucky. You can go home and have dinner. We are going to take a 5-minute break, and then we will have the next panel join us. Thank you very much. [Whereupon, at 5:36 p.m., the Committee was recessed.] After Recess [5:46 p.m.] Senator KLOBUCHAR [presiding].—We are going to get started with our next panel, if you could stand to be sworn in and raise your right hands. Do you affirm that the testimony you are about to give the Committee will be the truth, the whole truth and noth- ing but the truth, so help you God? [Witnesses sworn.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. We are joined here by Senator Sessions. I know Senator Kyl may be joining us and has been with us today, and whoever else stops by. But we want to thank you for coming. We have had a good afternoon. What I am going to do is introduce each of you individually and then you will give your 5 minutes of testimony. I know one of our VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00548 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 537 witnesses is a little late. So we are going to start here with you, Ms. Romero. Ramona Romero is the current national president of the Hispanic National Bar Association and the corporate counsel for logistics and energy at DuPont. She is also a cofounder and former board member of the Dominican-American National Roundtable. She is a graduate of Harvard Law School. Ms. Romero, we are honored to have you here. Thank you. We look forward to your testimony. You can give your testimony, be- cause our other witness got a little delayed coming over from the House. So thank you. STATEMENT OF RAMONA ROMERO, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, HISPANIC BAR ASSOCIATION Ms. ROMERO. Good afternoon. As Madam Chair said, my name is Ramona Romero and I am the national president of the Hispanic National Bar Association, which is known as the HNBA. We are grateful to Chairman Leahy, to you, Ranking Member Sessions, and to all of the members of the Committee for affording the HNBA the opportunity and honor of testifying at this hearing. This is the fifth time that we have appeared before this Com- mittee in support of the confirmation of a Supreme Court justice. We take great pleasure in endorsing Judge Sotomayor. Her support is based, first and foremost, on the merits of her stellar credentials. The HNBA was founded in 1972. One of its primary goals is to promote equal justice for all Americans by advancing the participa- tion of Hispanics in the legal profession. It is a nonprofit, voluntary bar association. We have 37 affiliates in 22 states. The HNBA is nonpartisan and it does not represent a particular ideology. Today, I am accompanied by nine former HNBA national presi- dents and vice president-elect. Like many Americans, we were proud when President Obama announced the nomination of Judge Sotomayor. As many members of this Committee know, for dec- ades, the HNBA has worked to promote a fair, independent and, yes, diverse judiciary, one that reflects the rich mosaic of the Amer- ican people. There are over 45 million Hispanics in the United States. We represent over 15 percent of the population. We are the largest, fastest growing and youngest segment of the population. Yet, His- panics are under-represented among lawyers and judges. The appointment of the first Hispanic to the Supreme Court is an important—an important symbolic milestone for our country, just like Justice Marshall was with respect to African-Americans and Justice O’Connor was with respect to women. The HNBA often reviews the qualifications of judicial candidates, regardless of background of politics. We consider a number of fac- tors: exceptional professional competence, intellect, character, in- tegrity, temperament, commitment to equal justice, and service to the American people and, also, to Hispanics, the community we serve. Judge Sotomayor more, more than satisfies all of these criteria. Before her nomination, we were already familiar with Judge Sotomayor’s impressive background. We had endorsed her for both of her prior judicial appointments. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00549 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 538 In 2005, the HNBA also named the judge on a bipartisan shortlist of eight potential Supreme Court nominees, prepared by a Supreme Court committee, after substantial due diligence. The HNBA’s Supreme Court committee, again, performed due diligence on her record after this nomination. As a result, we are confident that Judge Sotomayor is extraor- dinarily well qualified to serve as a justice for the Supreme Court. Some have suggested that, if confirmed, the judge will render deci- sions based on her personal bias. They could not be more wrong. Her extensive judicial record shows that her background and her experiences do not detract from her ability to adhere to the rule of law. On the contrary, they are a positive. Her story resonates with all Americans. She is proof that in our country, in our country, there is no limit, even for those of us from the most humble of backgrounds. Her confirmation will mark an- other key step in our journey as one nation, indivisible. We are grateful to President Obama for making a wise decision in nominating Judge Sotomayor. Our thanks to all Americans for their interest in one of our country’s shining stars. The HNBA thanks this Committee and urges the Senate to con- firm Judge Sotomayor. Thank you for listening. [The prepared testimony of Ms. Romero appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Ms. Romero. Also, welcome to all of the many past presidents that are there, that is quite a number, as well as vice presidents. We have now been joined by the honorable Nydia Vela´zquez, who is the Congresswoman here. I know she is incredibly busy and has joined us, and Senator Sessions and I have both agreed that you would not have to stay for questions. She is currently serving her ninth term as representative for New York’s 12 Congressional District. She was the first Puerto Rican woman elected to the U.S. House of Representatives and cur- rently serves as the Chairwoman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, Chair of the House Small Business Committee, and a sen- ior member of the Financial Services Committee. Because you missed the swearing in, we will do that now. This is the Senate Judiciary Committee, so welcome. Could you raise your right hand? Do you affirm that the testimony that you are about to give before the Committee is the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Representative VELA´ ZQUEZ. I do. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. You have 5 minutes, Congress- woman, and we are honored to have you here. Thank you. STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE LYDIA VELA´ ZQUEZ, CHAIR, CONGRESSIONAL HISPANIC CAUCUS Representative VELA´ ZQUEZ. Thank you. Madam Chairman, Rank- ing Member, and the members of the Committee, I have known Sonia Sotomayor for over 20 years. In fact, when I was first elected to Congress in 1993, I asked her to administer my oath of office. I can tell you personally that she is a grounded and professional individual. And over the last 3.5 VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00550 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 539 days, all of us have been able to see her considerable legal ability impressively displayed. Hispanics everywhere are proud that such a distinguished legal talent hails from our community. We have all been energized by her nomination. But, of course, that is not the reason why she should be confirmed. The case for Judge Sotomayor’s confirmation is built on her vast experience, keen intellect, and tremendous qualifications. It is not that Judge Sotomayor does not have a compelling life history. She does. As so many have already pointed out, hers is a uniquely American story, one that begins in the Bronx projects and ultimately reaches the highest echelons of our legal system. This background instilled within her the belief that hard work is rewarded and the knowledge that with the right combination of tal- ent and effort, anything is possible in America. These core values propelled Sonia Sotomayor to remarkable heights. As her career progressed, she managed to reach nearly every level of the legal system. With each new step, she excelled not only as a prosecutor and a litigator, but also as an appellate judge. Yet, throughout that process of achievement, she never once lost touch with her roots or her Bronx neighborhood. Instead, she aug- mented her vast legal experience with common sense under- standing of working class America. That appreciation will add a valuable perspective to the Supreme Court. Make no mistake. The stakes are high for Hispanic-Americans. The Supreme Court will rule on many matters that are critical to our community, from housing policy to voting rights. These are delicate issues. With many of these matters, passion runs deep on both sides. Re- solving them fairly will require objectivity, impartiality, and an un- wavering commitment to the rule of law. Judge Sotomayor’s record demonstrates these qualities. She has a reputation as a non-ideological jurist, someone who chooses not to spar with those who think differently, but to instead find com- mon ground. When working with Republican appointees, col- leagues, Sotomayor’s record will show that 95 percent of the time, she managed to forge consensus. She was able to do this because she commands a sophisticated grasp of legal argument and has a keen awareness of the law’s ef- fect on every American. When the Congressional Hispanic Caucus reviewed a broad range of qualified Supreme Court candidates, these were the traits we were looking for. We were looking for individuals who upheld constitutional values, exhibited a record of integrity, and had a pro- found, profound respect for our Constitution. It is our overwhelming belief that Judge Sotomayor meets these criteria. That is why we enthusiastically and unanimously endorse her nomination. Senators, the decision before the Committee today is one of your greatest responsibilities. I know this is something none of you on either side of the aisle take lightly. But I believe Judge Sotomayor’s record of judicial integrity, impartiality and, as she puts it, fidelity to the law, is one we can all admire regardless of party or ideology. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00551 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 540 If confirmed, Judge Sotomayor’s service on the court will bring great pride to the Hispanic community. That goes without saying. But more importantly, it will add another objective disciplined legal talent to that august body. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to answering any questions. You can send it to my office, but we are going right now, and I really, really appreciate the opportunity that you have given me on behalf of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. [The prepared testimony of Representative Vela´zquez appear as a submission for the record.] Senator SESSIONS. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Vela´zquez. That was an eloquent and personal statement. It means a lot to us, and you have contributed much to the hearing. Representative VELA´ ZQUEZ. Thank you. I know her well. I know her heart, her soul, her intellect, but, most importantly, her tem- perament and integrity. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you so much, Congresswoman Vela´zquez. We know you have to vote and there are many things going on over in the House. So we appreciate and understand that. Thank you very much. Next, we have Theodore M. Shaw. Mr. Shaw is a professor at Co- lumbia Law School and former director-counsel and president of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. He began his legal career in the Civil Rights Division of the United States Department of Justice. He is a graduate of Wesleyan University and the Columbia Univer- sity School of Law. Thank you very much, Mr. Shaw. We look forward to your testi- mony. STATEMENT OF THEODORE M. SHAW, PROFESSOR, COLUMBIA LAW SCHOOL Mr. SHAW. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator Ses- sions, and, in his absence, of course, Chairman Leahy. I have known Sonia Sotomayor for over 4 years. We first met in 1968 as freshmen at Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx. We were among a modest number of black and Latino students, perhaps 10 percent of that school’s population, in what was one of the most academically challenging high schools in New York City. It was a time of great change, great challenge. 1968 was the year that Dr. King was assassinated; also, Robert Kennedy; the year of the Chicago Democratic National Convention; and, there was much unrest. Many of the minority students at Spellman, including Sonia and I, came from the public housing projects of Harlem or the Bronx or the tenement houses that surrounded them. We were shaped by these extraordinary times and by the communities from which we came, for better or worse. During that time, the light of opportunity began to shine into corners of society that were long neglected for reasons of race and poverty. Many of us are beneficiaries of what has come to be known as affirmative action; that is, the conscious effort to open opportu- nities to individuals and groups that had been historically discrimi- nated against and excluded from mainstream America. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00552 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 541 Some people will immediately seize upon that description to talk about ‘‘unqualified’’ individuals. Affirmative action, properly struc- tured and implemented, lifts qualified individuals from obscurity rooted in unearned inequality. In spite of her brilliance, there was a time when someone like Judge Sotomayor would have been routinely left out of the main- stream of opportunities we have come to associate with somebody of her capabilities and accomplishments. Sonia was at the top of our class at Cardinal Spellman High School. Everyone, white, black, Latino, Asian, ranked behind her. She was studious, independent-minded, mature beyond her years, thoughtful. She wasn’t easily influenced by what was going on around her. She walked her own path. To be sure, Sonia was comfortable in her own skin and proud of her community and her heritage. She did not run from who or what she was and is. Still, Sonia was not one to be easily swayed by peer pressure, fads, or the politics of others around her. She approached any issue from the standpoint of fierce intellec- tual curiosity and integrity. In fact, she was an intellectual power- house. Sonia was a leader among students at Cardinal Spellman High School. She set the pace at which others wanted to run. Sonia did not live a life of privilege. She lost her father at a very young age. She had been diagnosed with diabetes even before she came to high school. It was not something I remember her talking about. She simply carried herself with an air of dignity, seriousness of purpose, and a sense that she was going somewhere. In my 4 years of high school, I never saw Sonia interact with anyone in a disrespectful or contentious or antagonistic manner. Her temperament was even then judicious. In short, although I never told her then and although she did not know it, I envied her intellectual capacity, her discipline, her un- questionable integrity. I admired her. After graduating from Cardinal Spellman at the top of our class and as valedictorian, she was off to Princeton and, somewhat fur- ther down in the rankings, I was off to Wesleyan. I did not stay in touch with her over many of the ensuing years, but we did meet up again some years later. I followed her as one does a star from one’s high school orbit. Eventually, of course, she went on to Yale Law School after Prince- ton. She excelled in everything she did. Her qualifications for the Supreme Court would ordinarily be a no-brainer but for the politics of judicial nomination. I have faith that the Senate and this Committee will not let those politics get in the way. My career has been as a civil rights lawyer. I have been in the midst of ideological warfare on contentious issues. I have been un- abashed about my point of view. I am conscious of the fact that as I testify about Sonia, there may be some who project my thoughts and beliefs on to her. Some have already tried to label her as an activist outside of the political mainstream. To be sure, I consider those who work for ra- cial justice and other civil rights to be a vital part of mainstream America. But Sonia’s life has not been lived on the battlefield of VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00553 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 542 ideology or partisanship, where many of us who are labeled or who label ourselves as liberal or conservative have locked horns. Indeed, her record defies simplistic label. She began her legal ca- reer as a prosecutor, not ordinarily a job thought of as a bastion of liberal activism. Her service on the board of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense Fund both speaks to the strength of that organiza- tion and the range of her interests from prosecution to civil rights. Her service was commendable. In fact, this range of experience and commitment places Judge Sotomayor in the mainstream of middle America, where surely Americans are both interested in the prosecution and punishment of those who engage in criminal activi- ties, as well as the protection of civil rights and elimination of in- vidious discrimination. I have much more to say, but it is in my written testimony and I see my time is expiring. I would like to refer you to my comments on this whole notion of experience and what that brings to the bench. But to conclude, I want to say that she has served our nation for 17 years as a Federal district court judge and then as an appellate judge with great distinction. Now, she is being considered for an appointment as associate justice to the United States Supreme Court. Candor compels me to admit that I swell with pride when I con- template the possibility that my high school classmate may ascend to the highest court in the land. But quite aside from this petty and undeserved pride on the part of one who was merely a high school classmate, there are millions of Americans who see for the first time the possibility that someone who looks like them or who comes from a background like theirs may serve on the United States Supreme Court, someone who is supremely qualified, by any measure. It is a great honor for Judge Sotomayor that President Obama has nominated her to the United States Supreme Court. It will be even a greater honor for our nation if she were to be confirmed and were to serve. Thank you. [The prepared testimony of Mr. Shaw appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Appreciate it, Mr. Shaw. Our next witness is Tim Jeffries. Tim Jeffries is the founder of P7 Enterprises, a management consulting practice located in Scottsdale, Arizona. Mr. Jeffries serves on the board of directors of several corporations and nonprofit organizations, including the Na- tional Organization for Victims Assistance and the Arizona Voice for Crime Victims. I don’t know if you want to add anything, Senator Kyl. Senator KYL. Well, Madam Chairman, thank you for that oppor- tunity. I think you will see, when he testifies, the basis for his knowledge and passion about the protection of victims’ rights and I think that will speak for itself and I am anxious to follow-up with the questions, as well. But I thank you very much. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Welcome to the Committee, Mr. Jeffries. We look forward to your testimony. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00554 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 543 STATEMENT OF TIM JEFFRIES, FOUNDER, P7 ENTERPRISES Mr. JEFFRIES. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Senator Sessions, Senator Kyl. I appreciate the humbling invitation to provide my personal testimony in opposition to the honorable Judge Sotomayor’s appointment to the U.S. Supreme Court. The views that I express here today are my own and not the views of any or- ganization I may reference. As my bio shows, I come from a blue collar family. My father’s grandfather served in the Union Army during the Civil War and rode for the Pony Express. My mother’s grandparents emigrated from Portugal to America in the 1900s with no money in their pocket and no English in their vocabularies. Similar to thousands of other simple, hardworking Americans, my involvement in the crime victims support movement was borne from unimaginable tragedy. On November 3, 1981, my beloved older brother, Michael, was kidnaped, beaten, tortured and mur- dered by a transient gang of street criminals in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The two murderers stabbed my dear, defenseless brother 65 times and ultimately killed Michael by slashing his throat and crushing his skull with the heel of a remorseless, blood-soaked boot. Based on Federal crime statistics, 17,000 people are murdered in our country every year. On average, someone is murdered every 31 minutes. On average, every 10 weeks, more people are murdered in our country than passed on that brutal, horrible day of Sep- tember 11. In fact, since September 11, 115,000 people have been murdered in America. This gut-wrenching level of violence in our country ex- ceeds the approximate population of Santa Clara, California or Gresham, Oregon or Peoria, Illinois or Allentown, Pennsylvania. Further compounding this epic national crisis, other violent crimes in our country are committed at an appalling rate. Based on the crime clock produced by the Office for Victims of Crime in the Department of Justice, someone is raped in our county every 1.9 minutes. Someone is assaulted in our country every 36.9 sec- onds. An instance of child abuse or neglect is reported every 34.9 seconds. Making matters worse, this breathtaking spectrum of heinous vi- olence in our country does not receive the consistent political action it warrants and the constant media focus it deserves. Prior to my testimony, my wife sent me a text and she asked, ‘‘Where are all the Senators? ’’ And perhaps that is a metaphor for what vexes and undermines the crime victims support movement. The true horror in verifiable existence of evil in our country are often minimized, if not trivialized, with well intentioned, yet sadly misguided equivocations about the troubled lives of guilty criminals and their various personal circumstances. Unfortunately, based on public statements, Judge Sotomayor has repeatedly offered misplaced sympathy for criminals, despite the fact that justice exists to protect the innocent and to punish the guilty. Forgiveness and mercy are one thing. Punishment and ac- countability are another. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00555 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 544 In four situations, four different events that are noted in my tes- timony, Judge Sotomayor sympathy and perhaps empathy for criminals that may be well intentioned, but I feel is tragically mis- placed. At a Columbia Law School public service dinner, she stated, ‘‘It is all too easy as a prosecutor to feel the pain and suffering of vic- tims and to forget that defendants, despite whatever illegal act they have committed, however despicable their acts may have been, the defendants are human being.’’ In January 1995, in receiving the Hogan-Morganthau Award, Judge Sotomayor stated, ‘‘The end result of a legal process is to find a winner. However, for every winner, there is a loser, and the loser is himself or herself a victim,’’ forgetting for the fact that when meeting justice, it’s not to find a winner, it’s to find justice. On July 12, 1993, in a Federal sentencing hearing that she pre- sided over, over a cocaine dealer, Judge Sotomayor apologized to the cocaine dealer for having to send him to Federal prison. She stated the mandatory 5-year sentence was a ‘‘great tragedy for our country.’’ She also stated she hoped the cocaine dealer ‘‘will appreciate that we all understand that you were a victim of the economic necessities of our society.’’ Then she added, ‘‘But unfortu- nately, there are laws I must impose.’’ Having viewed the autopsy photos of my massacred brother and heard the heartbreaking stories of thousands of victims and sur- vivors of violent crimes in America, I believe Judge Sotomayor’s sympathy for criminals at the expense of the burdens carried by crime victims is unworthy of our nation’s highest court, where pub- lic safety and protection of the innocent should be paramount. Whereas Judge Sotomayor’s biography is admirable and compel- ling, it is a great American story of which, as an American, I am proud. I am deeply troubled that she has regularly offered well in- tentioned, yet misguided sympathy to criminals without notable deference to the pain and suffering of the victim. These are the very people who need government’s protection. Sta- tistics show that the most egregious crime in our country dis- proportionately impacts the poor, the disadvantaged, the down- trodden, the defenseless. These are the very people that the jus- tices in our highest court must have sympathy for, must have em- pathy for. Madam Chairman, I appreciate your patience with my testimony that has extended beyond its time. Senator KLOBUCHAR. That is fine, Mr. Jeffries. Mr. JEFFRIES. And I would be happy to answer any questions at the appropriate time. [The prepared testimony of Mr. Jeffries appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. That is fine, and thank you for sharing that tragic story. It must have been very difficult. Neomi Rao is our next witness. Neomi Rao is a professor of law at George Mason University. Previously, she served as associate counsel and special assistant to President George W. Bush and served as a counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee. She is a graduate of the University of Chicago Law School, that is some- thing we have in common. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00556 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 545 Professor Rao clerked for Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thom- as and Fourth Circuit Judge J. Harvey Wilkinson. I look forward to your testimony. Thank you for being here. STATEMENT OF NEOMI RAO, PROFESSOR, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY LAW SCHOOL Ms. RAO. Thank you very much, Madam Chairman, Senator Ses- sions and other distinguished members of this Committee. It is an honor to testify at these historic hearings, which have provided the opportunity to have a respectful public dialog about the important work of the Supreme Court and the judicial philosophy of an ac- complished nominee. I have submitted more detailed written testimony and I should state at the outset that I take no position on the ultimate question of the confirmation of Judge Sotomayor. In my opening remarks, I would like to highlight some points about the judicial role. During these hearings, Judge Sotomayor has expressed broad principles about fidelity to the law with which we can all agree. But fidelity to the law can mean very different things to different judges. Although in her testimony she has distanced herself from some of her earlier remarks, her speeches and writings might still be helpful in understanding her view of the judicial process. First, Judge Sotomayor has explicitly rejected the idea that there can be an objective stance in judging. She has explained that every case has a series of perspectives and thus requires an individual choice by the judge. This goes beyond recognizing the need to exercise judgment in hard cases or the idea that reasonable judges may at times dis- agree. If there is no objective view, one can question whether there is any law at all apart from the judge’s personal choices. Second, there is the related issue of the role of personal experi- ences in judicial decision-making. It would be hard to deny that judges are human and made up of their unique life journeys. Many judges recognize this and explain how they strive to remain impar- tial by putting aside their personal preferences. Judge Sotomayor’s position, however, has suggested that her per- sonal background, her race, gender and life experiences, should af- fect judicial decisions. Throughout her testimony, Judge Sotomayor has reaffirmed that she decides cases by applying the law to facts and that she does not follow what is in her heart. Of course, all nominees to the Su- preme Court honestly state their fidelity to the law. Nonetheless, this leaves open the question of how a judge chooses to be faithful to the law. Judges go about this task in different ways. Following the law could mean, as formalists believe, that the judicial role and the privilege of political independence require judges to stick closely to the actual words of statutes and the Con- stitution. The basic idea is that by focusing on the written law, judges act as fair and impartial arbiters. Other judges consider that they are following the law when they interpret it to conform to what is rational or coherent or just. They believe that following the law means trying to bring about what they consider to be the best outcome, all things considered. These VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00557 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 546 judges may be ruled by pragmatism or personal values, such as empathy. Even with a sincere purpose of following the law, judges use very different methods for finding what the law requires. For example, some judges are far more likely to determine that the law is ambig- uous and, therefore, requires the judge to fill in the gaps. If the judge finds the law indeterminate, he or she may look to outside sources, such as international law, or to personal values about what is fair or rational. Pragmatic, flexible interpretation of the law allows significant room for individual assessments of what the law requires, as each judge will have his or her own concep- tions about what is best. If the law is really a series of perspectives, this suggests a very thin conception of law. Fidelity to law as a series of perspectives is something very different from fidelity to law as binding written commands of the legislature and Constitution. If law is simply one’s own perspective, then fidelity to law is little more than fidel- ity to one’s own views. The Supreme Court gets a final word with regard to constitu- tional interpretation. A nominee’s judicial philosophy is important, because on the Supreme Court, the only real restraint is self-re- straint. Our constitutional structure does not give judges political power. It gives them the judicial power to decide particular cases through an evenhanded application of the law; to fairly interpret statutes and the Constitution for all that they contain, not more, not less. In our courts, the rule of law should prevail over the rule of what the judge thinks is best. Thank you for giving me the chance to tes- tify today. [The prepared testimony of Ms. Rao appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Ms. Rao, for your testimony. Next, we have John McGinnis. John McGinnis is a pro- fessor of law at Northwestern University. Previously, he was a dep- uty assistant attorney general in the Department of Justice’s Office of Legal Policy; a graduate of Harvard Law School, where he was the editor of the Harvard Law Review, something he has in com- mon with President Obama. That is not true? Mr. McGinnis. He was president of the Harvard Law Review. Senator KLOBUCHAR. You were editor. Well, we could just pre- tend for today. Professor McGinnis also clerked on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Thank you for being here, Professor McGinnis. We look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF JOHN MCGINNIS, PROFESSOR, NORTHWESTERN UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF LAW Mr. MCGINNIS. Thank you so much, Chairman Klobuchar, Rank- ing Member Sessions, for the opportunity to address you. At the outset, I want to make clear that, like my colleague, I am not tak- ing any position on Judge Sotomayor’s nomination, although I will say she has my respect and good wishes. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00558 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 547 What this hearing affords is one of the rare opportunities for a constitutional conversation with the American people and where the correct constitutional principles can be identified. Ultimately, the Constitution rests on the people’s confidence in the Constitution and their fidelity to the principles. Only once the correct constitutional principles are identified can the Nation meas- ure a nominee’s adherence to those principles and so determine whether he or she should be confirmed. My subject, the use of international and foreign law, is an issue of substantial importance, not least because the Supreme Court has come to rely on such material. For instance, in Lawrence v. Texas, the Supreme Court recently relied on the European Court of Human Rights as part of its decision to strike down a statute of one of our states. In my view, such reliance distorts the meaning of our Constitu- tion. It undermines domestic democracy and it threatens to alien- ate Americans from a document that is their common bond. So what are the correct principles? I think they can be simply stated. They are that judges should avoid giving any weight to con- temporary foreign or international law unless the language of the Constitution calls for it, and the language of the Constitution gen- erally does not. If the Constitution, as I believe, should be interpreted according to the meaning it had at the time it was ratified, it follows directly that the use of contemporary foreign or international law is not proper. The problem with this use, in fact, is that it’s contemporary, not simply the fact that it’s foreign or international, because the mean- ing of the Constitution was fixed at the time it was ratified. But even if one is a self-styled pragmatist about constitutional theory, the use of contemporary foreign or international law in con- stitutional jurisprudence is still objectionable. Pragmatists believe the Constitution should only invalidate our laws if they have bad consequences. But a conflict between our law and foreign law is not appropriately used to create any doubt about the beneficence of our own law. Foreign law is formulated to be good for that foreign nation, not for ours. Indeed, a proposition of foreign law is really only the tip of an iceberg of some complex set of social norms in other nations. But since the United Nations doesn’t share all those norms, im- porting that single legal proposition into our nation can have very bad consequences for us. International law differs from foreign law, because international at least purports to have some kind of uni- versality, which foreign law does not. But raw international law also lacks any democratic pedigree and can cast doubt on our democratically made law. Indeed, inter- national law has multiple democratic defects. Totalitarian nations have participated in its fabrication. Very unrepresentative groups, like law professors, still shape its form. It’s also hardly transparent. American citizens have enough trou- ble trying to figure out what goes on in hearings like this one, let alone in diplomatic meetings in Geneva. As I read Judge Sotomayor’s speech on this issue, her position depends on propositions that seem, to me, in some tension. Judge VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00559 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 548 Sotomayor stated that justices should not use foreign or inter- national law, but they should consider the ideas they find in such materials in their decision-making. I understand, at this hearing, Judge Sotomayor disavowed the use of such materials to have any influence on jurisprudence, and I welcome that disavowal. What she left unexplained, to my satis- faction at least, however, is her view in the speech that such mate- rials can help us decide our issues; her praise for the use of such law in Lawrence v. Texas, which expressly relied on that European human rights decision; and, perhaps most puzzling of all, her en- dorsement and her praise for Justice Ginsberg’s view when it’s well known that Justice Ginsberg, in contrast with, say, Justice Scalia, believes that such materials are relevant to decision-making. Indeed, Justice Ginsberg says that they’re nothing less than the basic denominators of fairness between the Governors and the gov- erned. Foreign and international law may well contain good ideas, as Justice Sotomayor suggested, but so many other sources that have no weight and should not, I think, routinely be cited as authority. To put the question in perspective, undoubtedly, the Bible and the Quran have many legal ideas that many people think are good, but we would be rightly concerned if judges used them as guidance for interpreting the Constitution or even routinely cited them. Depending on what text the judge cited and what she omitted, we might think she was biased in favor of one tradition at the ex- pense of others. In my view, the rule of law itself ultimately is founded on the proposition that only material that is formally relevant should have weight in a judge’s decision, and the way a judge can demonstrate adherence to the rule of law in this context is extremely simple— simply refrain from appealing to the authority of foreign of inter- national law in her opinion. Thank you very much. [The prepared testimony of Mr. McGinnis appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Professor McGinnis. Last, but not least, we have Professor Rosenkranz. Nicholas Quinn Rosenkranz is an associate professor at Georgetown University Law Center. After graduating from Yale Law School, he clerked for Judge Frank Easterbrook on the U.S. court of appeals for the sev- enth circuit and for Justice Anthony Kennedy on the U.S. Supreme Court. He then served as an attorney advisor at the Office of Legal Counsel in the United States Department of Justice. You should know, Mr. Rosenkranz, that Judge Easterbrook was my professor at law school and I know that must have been kind of a tough clerkship. I am sure you had to work very hard. So we look forward to hearing your testimony. Thank you. STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS QUINN ROSENKRANZ, PROFESSOR, GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY LAW CENTER Mr. ROSENKRANZ. Madam Chair, thank you. Ranking Member Sessions, members of the Committee, I thank you all for the oppor- tunity to testify at this momentous hearing. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00560 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 549 I, too, have been asked to comment on the use of contemporary foreign legal materials in the interpretation of the U.S. Constitu- tion. I agree entirely with Professor McGinnis’s analysis. In my remarks, I’ll try to explain why this sort of reliance on for- eign law is in tention with fundamental notions of democratic self- governance. I should emphasize that I, too, take no position on the ultimate question of whether Judge Sotomayor should be con- firmed, and I offer my comments with the greatest respect. But I am concerned that her recent speech on this issue may betray a misconception about how to interpret the United States Constitu- tion. In this room, and at the Supreme Court, and in law schools, and throughout the nation, we speak of our Constitution in almost metaphysical terms. In the United States, we revere our Constitu- tion. And well we should; it is the single greatest charter of govern- ment in history. But it is worth remembering exactly what it is that we revere. The Constitution is a text. It is comprised of words on parchment. A copy fits comfortably in an inside pocket, but cop- ies don’t quite do it justice. The original is just down the street at the National Archives, and it is something to see. It is sealed in a titanium case filled with argon gas, and at night it is kept in an underground vault. But during the day, anyone can go and see it and read it, and everyone should. The parchment is in remarkably good condition. And the words are still clearly visible. The most important job of a Supreme Court justice is to discern what the words on that piece of parchment mean. The job is not to instill the text with meaning. The job is not to declare what the text should mean. It is to discern, using standard tools of legal in- terpretation, the meaning of the words on that piece of parchment. Now, sometimes the meaning of the text is not obvious. One might need to turn to other sources to help understand the mean- ing of the words. One might, for example, turn to the Federalist Papers or to early Supreme Court cases to see what other wise law- yers thought that those words meant. But what the Supreme Court has done in two recent and con- troversial cases is to rely on contemporary foreign law in deter- mining the meaning of the United States Constitution. And this is the practice that Judge Sotomayor seemed to endorse in her recent speech. But when one is trying to figure out the meaning of the document down the street at the Archives, it is mysterious why one would need to study other legal documents, written in other lan- guages, for other purposes, in other political circumstances, hun- dreds of years later and thousands of miles away. To put the point most simply, as a general matter, it is unfathomable how the law of, say, France, in 2009, could help one discern the original public meaning of the United States Constitution. Those who would rely on such sources must be engaged in a dif- ferent project. They must be trying to update the Constitution to bring it in line with world opinion. To put the point most starkly, this sort of reliance on contemporary foreign law must be, in es- sence, a mechanism of constitutional change. Foreign law changes all the time, and it has changed continu- ously since the Founding. If modern foreign law is relevant to con- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00561 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 550 stitutional interpretation, it follows that a change in foreign law can alter the meaning of the United States Constitution. And that is why this issue is so important. The notion of the court ‘‘updating’’ the Constitution to reflect its own evolving view of good government is troubling enough. But the notion that this evolution may be brought about by changes in foreign law violates basic premises of democratic self-governance. When the Supreme Court declares that the Constitution evolves—and it declares fur- ther that foreign law may affect its evolution—it is declaring noth- ing less than the power of foreign governments to change the meaning of the United States Constitution. And even if the court purports to seek a foreign ‘‘consensus,’’ a single foreign country might tip the scales. Indeed, foreign govern- ments might even attempt this deliberately. France, for example, has declared that one of its priorities is the abolition of capital pun- ishment in the United States. Yet surely the American people would rebel at the thought of the French Parliament deciding whether to abolish the death penalty—not just in France, but also thereby, in America. After all, foreign control over American law was a primary griev- ance of the Declaration of Independence. It, too, may be found at the National Archives, and its most resonant protest was that King George III had ‘‘subject[ed] us to a jurisdiction foreign to our con- stitution.’’ This is exactly what is at stake here—foreign government control over the meaning of our Constitution. Any such control, even at the margin, is inconsistent with our basic founding principles of democ- racy and self-governance. I hope that the Committee will continue to explore Judge Sotomayor’s views on this important issue. Thank you. [The prepared testimony of Mr. Rosenkranz appear as a submis- sion for the record.] Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, to all of you. Just to clarify, Mr. Rosenkranz, the one case that Judge Sotomayor consid- ered on the death penalty, she actually sustained it. She rejected a claim that it did not apply and I do not think she used foreign law at all to say that it did not apply. She actually sustained the death penalty. Are you aware of that case, the Heatley case? Mr. ROSENKRANZ. Yes, I am aware of it. I am referring primarily to the speech that she gave on this topic. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Okay. Well, I would say that her opinion probably rules, if you look at how she actually ruled on this. She did not say that you could not have the death penalty because of French law. Thank you. Ms. Romero, I had some questions about your testimony. You talked about the fact that Ms. Sotomayor’s opinions are character- ized by a diligent application of the law, reasoned judgment, and an unwavering commitment to upholding the Constitution and Su- preme Court precedent. Do you want to talk to me about how you reached that conclu- sion? Ms. ROMERO. We have a Supreme Court committee, as I men- tioned, and the committee conducted a thorough review of her background. In addition to reviewing about 100 of her cases, we VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00562 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 551 commissioned a review by a group of law professors who reviewed about 100 of her cases. We reviewed many of her speeches and articles and, also, spoke to dozens of colleagues and people who know her. So we conducted a fairly extensive due diligence. So our conclusion is based pri- marily on our review of her cases, which I think is what really should prevail here. Senator KLOBUCHAR. You also noted in your remarks that the judge’s opinions can’t be readily associated with a particular polit- ical persuasion or judicial philosophy, and I think that may be re- flected in the fact that she has been endorsed—in our last panel, Louis Freeh, who had been appointed by George H.W. Bush and, also, served as the FBI director. We had the Fraternal Order of Police, the largest police organiza- tion in the country. We have had the National District Attorneys Association that supports her and, in fact, a review of her sen- tences shows that she is right in the mainstream. I questioned her yesterday about some of her white collar sen- tences were actually quite lengthier than some of her colleagues. Do you want to talk about what you mean by that her opinions cannot be readily associated with a particular political persuasion or judicial philosophy? Ms. ROMERO. Well, there is no pattern that emerges of an activ- ist judge here. It is quite apparent that her opinions are highly driven in that she relies extensively on the application of the law to the facts that face her. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. Mr. Shaw, do you want to com- ment a bit about what she was like in high school? You said she was judicious and I was trying to imagine if I was judicious in high school. But you did know her from Cardinal Spellman High School. Is that correct? Mr. SHAW. Cardinal Spellman High School in the Bronx and her temperament was even-keeled, calm. She was very thoughtful, fair- minded. She treated all individuals equally. She exhibited many of the qualities that she exhibits now. Some of the testimony I have heard here is delivered by people who don’t know her and, frankly, who won’t let the facts get in the way. It has nothing to do with who she is. But I understand part of what goes on at these hearings. Her career is one that has been very extensive as a judge and I cannot tell you that she would rule in the way that I would want her to rule in every case if she were confirmed to the Supreme Court. She hasn’t done that in her career so far. But I don’t think that’s the standard. I think that all any of us can expect and hope for and want is that she is fair, open-minded, and that she applies the law to the facts, and, clearly, her record has done that. Her speeches are not how she should be judged. It’s her 17-year record on the bench. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you. In fact, I imagine you might not have agreed with some of the decisions. I think we found out that of the discrimination claims that are brought before her, she re- jected 81 percent of them and, of course, had found for some of them. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00563 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 552 So I think it is a tribute, Mr. Shaw, that you would still be here knowing that you may not have agreed with her on every single de- cision that she made. Thank you very much. Mr. SHAW. Thank you. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. I want to recognize Senator Kyl and let him have my time now. But I would just note Senator Kyl is a superb lawyer, senior member of this Committee, involved in the leader- ship of the Senate. So I know that is why he has had to get back over right now, because a lot of things are happening. He also has argued three cases before the U.S. Supreme Court, which very few lawyers in this country can have the honor of ever arguing one. Senator KYL. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you, Senator Sessions. Just to give you one idea about what it is like to be in leadership, we are trying to figure out right now, and the reason I have been consulting my Blackberry, while listening out of both ears to your testimony, and I thank all of you for being here, is we are trying to figure out if we are going to come back here and vote at 1 a.m. tomorrow morning or we are going to try to have three different votes here yet this evening and not come back at 1 a.m., the kinds of things Senators consider all the time. Again, let me thank all of you. First, with regard to the last two panelists, I very much appreciate your discussion of foreign law. It is a subject that I think this Committee needs to pay a lot more attention to. Judge Sotomayor has said two contradictory things and it will be up for us to try to square which will, in fact, govern her decisions on the Supreme Court, should she be confirmed. She said, on the one hand, on numerous occasions, that she thinks that foreign law should be considered and that she agreed with Justice Ginsberg and disagreed with Thomas and Scalia. I think, Mr. Rosenkranz, you pointed out what that means in terms of the use of foreign law. Yet, she has said here, even, I think, this morning, that she does not think foreign law should be used in interpreting the Constitu- tion or statutes. So we are left to wonder and I guess we will just have to try to figure that out. I also wanted to specifically ask Tim Jeffries a question. I know Tim Jeffries and I know of his considerable work on behalf of vic- tims of crime, and that is why I think you are a good person to an- swer this question, Tim. To me, there is one place where empathy does play a role in a judge’s decisions and I can think of only this one situation, and it is at the time of sentencing, when at least some states and the Fed- eral Government now allows persons who are not parties before the court to make statements before the court at the time of sen- tencing. That is a time where, to the extent there is discretion with re- spect to sentencing, a judge can take into account what people tell him about the victim, about the defendant, about other matters, and empathy cannot help but play a role in that. Could you just remind us, from your perspective of having worked for victims’ rights now, why it is important for judges to VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00564 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 553 consider the point of view of victims, in this particular situation, in sentencing statements or in the other situations in which it is appropriate for a victim or a victim’s advocate to make an appear- ance in a given case? Mr. JEFFRIES. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Senator Kyl. As you know, in the U.S. Constitution, there are over 20 references to defendants’ rights. There are no references to victims’ rights. Currently, under the Crime Victims’ Rights Act, which is Federal law, there are statutory protections for victims of Federal crimes, which those protections provide the right to be informed, to be present, to be heard. But that is just for Federal crimes. If you look at the states in our great union, it is a patchwork quilt of victims’ protections and in upwards to 15 states, there are no victims’ protections whatsoever. It is challenging enough that incomprehensible crime is committed in our country. Fifty people will be murdered today, 760 people will be raped today, over 3,000 people will be assaulted, and over 4,000 children will be abused. It’s incomprehensible and as if that is not tough enough, when people enter the justice system, which should exist to do just things, revictimization often takes place. Judge Sotomayor is a great American story, valedictorian of her grade school, valedictorian of her high school, the Pyne Prize at Princeton, summa cum laude, phi beta kappa, editor of the Yale Law Journal. She has written 380 opinions. She has given over 180 speeches. Even today, she said, ‘‘It’s important to use simple words,’’ and I quote. So I can assure everyone here that when a victim, a victim’s fam- ily is in a courtroom, above and beyond the fact that they’re looking for justice that the system should mete, they’re looking for the kindness that a just system should provide. And whereas I continue to be very impressed with the honorable Judge Sotomayor’s story and her record of accomplishment and all the incredible witnesses that have come to support her, I’m ex- tremely concerned that a jurist who understands how important words are, through several decades of speeches, could be so cavalier as it pertains to victims’ feelings. And as I stated in my prepared remarks, forgiveness and mercy are one thing. Justice and accountability are another thing. And so I am just hopeful, I am prayerful that if Judge Sotomayor is con- firmed to our nation’s highest court, that she will never lose sight of what I’m sure were some very hard days she spent as a pros- ecutor. And with all due respect to the troubled lives of guilty criminals, we should be focused on victims. Senator KYL. Thank you. Thank you, all panelists. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much. Senator Kaufman. Senator KAUFMAN. I just have a few questions. Ms. Romero, can you tell us what Judge Sotomayor’s confirmation would mean to your organization, the long struggle for greater diversity on the Federal bench? Ms. ROMERO. It’s not only about our organization. I think it’s about all Americans. It’s about all Americans seeing themselves re- flected at the highest levels of our profession. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00565 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 554 It’s about public trust in the integrity of the judicial system. It’s about public faith and public understanding about the law. On the day that Justice Souter announced his retirement, I was in New Mexico speaking to a group of high school students, 600 high school students, primarily Hispanic, in an underserved area of New Mex- ico, of Albuquerque, and I told them, ‘‘I’m going to speak with you for about 5 minutes, give me 5 minutes, and if you want to, after- wards, I will answer any questions you want.’’ I spoke to them for 5 minutes. Then they asked me questions for 40 minutes. So I was very proud of the fact that they were enor- mously interested in the law. But some of the questions were a lit- tle bit more than troubling in the sense that they reflected some distrust in their interactions with the judicial system and on how the community interacts with the judicial system. So one of our missions as a bar association is to try to educate youngsters about the fact that the law really is fair and is just and that it reflects them and that it is accessible to them. So it’s about that, it’s about access. Senator KAUFMAN. Professor Shaw, can you tell us, just from your vast background, just a little bit about the function of legal defense funds and how they serve society? Mr. SHAW. Sure. I worked for almost 26 years for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, ending up being director, counsel and presi- dent. The Legal Defense Fund is the organization that was borne out of the NAACP, which I consider to be and I think most histo- rians would consider to be the oldest civil rights organization in this country, even though another claim has been made here today. But the Legal Defense Fund litigated Brown v. Board of Edu- cation and many of the major civil rights cases on behalf of Afri- can-Americans, but also others. PRLDEF was modeled after the Legal Defense Fund, as were many other legal defense funds, in- cluding some of the conservative legal defense funds that now exist in other institutions in other parts of the world. One of the things I would underscore, because I listened with great interest to some of the things that some of the witnesses said about Judge Sotomayor’s role as a board member, I know that as deputy director of the Legal Defense Fund and then director-coun- sel, we made sure that the board understood its role and the staff understood its role. The board was not responsible for the selection of cases or re- sponsible for legal strategy. In fact, I worked very hard to make sure that those lines remain drawn. That’s not to say that the board didn’t get engaged in policy, but the staff and the lawyers and the leadership of the organization have responsibility for legal strategy and, also, for deciding what cases would be filed. And I think that’s pretty much the way most legal defense funds, including PRLDEF, operated. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you very much. I want to thank the entire panel for being here today. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Thank all of you. This is another good panel and I think it is enriching our discussion. These will all be part of the record. It is reflective of a commitment that the Sen- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00566 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 555 ate should make and must make to make sure this process is han- dled correctly. So thank you all. I think the foreign law matter is a big deal to me. Some people make out like it is nothing to this, this is just talk. But it is baf- fling to me how a person of discipline would think that foreign opinions or foreign statutes or U.N. resolution could influence the interpretation of an American statute, some of which may be 1970, 1776. I think you mentioned, Mr. Rosenkranz, that Americans revere the Constitution. I remember at a judicial conference, 11th circuit, Professor Van Alstine said that if you respect the Constitution, if you clearly respect it, you will enforce it as it is written, whether you like it or not; if you don’t do that, then you disrespect it and you weaken it. And the next judge, someday further down the line, will be even more likely to weaken it further and just because you may like the direction somebody bent the Constitution this year in this case does not mean you are going to like it in the future, and our liberties then become greater at risk. Would you agree with that? Mr. ROSENKRANZ. Absolutely, Senator. Senator SESSIONS. Ms. Rao, you discussed of these philosophies. How do you feel about that? Ms. Rao, I am not a legal philosopher and one of the level thoughts I have had in the back of my mind, I think Judge Sotomayor would have been better served to stay away from legal philosophers. It may be the way her momma raised her and so forth. But legal philosophies are another thing. But she expressed some affirmation of legal realism. Is that not a more cynical approach to the law in which the theory is some- what to the effect that, well, it is not realistic to be idealistic about words having definite meanings and we all know judges do dif- ferently. Is that a fairly decent summary of that and the danger of that philosophy? Ms. RAO. I think that is one of the dangers of legal realism. I think that there are two parts of legal realism. There is one part that is largely descriptive, which is that legal realism means that often a judge’s viewpoint is going to influence their judging, and I think that everyone recognizes that’s a possibility. But I think many people go a step beyond that to say, well, a judge’s individual views should shape their judging, and I think that is a big step. Senator SESSIONS. So in this law review article, you have read that. Did you read the law review article she wrote? I am not sure it is an explicit endorsement, but it is certainly an affirmation of that philosophy in many ways in her references to it. Would you agree? Ms. RAO. It seemed that way to me, as well. And I think it’s also supported by her other statements in which she has said that there is no objective stance in judging. I think that is all part of the same general idea. Senator SESSIONS. And there were only perspectives, was that the language? Do you remember those words? Ms. RAO. Only a series of perspectives. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00567 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 556 Senator SESSIONS. That does not mean much to me. I am not sure I am comfortable with a judge who thinks things are just a series of perspectives. Have any of you been familiar with the French judicial philos- ophy that involves single decisions? I am told it is a technique that the French courts utilize to have—my time has—— Senator KLOBUCHAR. You can keep going. Just speak in French from now on. Senator SESSIONS. I studied it for 2 years. My understanding is that the French courts frequently use very short, unsigned opin- ions, without dissents and without discussion. So it is very difficult to understand the principle behind their approach to law. So I just wonder about that. Are you familiar? I didn’t see any. Thank you all for your comments and thoughts. We appreciate it very much. This is an important issue and we value your insight. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Thank you very much, Senator Sessions. And I wanted to thank all of you, as well. Actually, Mr. Rosenkranz, I did appreciate your testimony. I think it is a valued issue to discuss. But I just wanted to make it clear, when I asked you that question about the case, in fact, Judge Sotomayor has written or joined more than 3,000 opinions in her 17 years as a judge and she has never used foreign law to interpret the Constitu- tion or statutes, and including the case I mentioned. That does not mean that it is not a valid point to discuss. Mr. ROSENKRANZ. She has never used foreign law to interpret the Constitution. I think she may have used it to interpret a Federal statute. Senator KLOBUCHAR. The point of the issue is that when you brought up the death penalty in the French system, is that she had not used foreign law. In fact, she sustained the death penalty in that case. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. There is a national debate. Just Ginsberg fa- vored that in her speech. She endorsed the Ginsberg model and criticized the Scalia model. Senator KLOBUCHAR. And then one last thing that I wanted to put on the record, a July 9 New York Times article entitled ‘‘Sotomayor Meted Out Stiff Prison Terms, Report Indicates,’’ in which it states that, ‘‘Most striking was the finding that across the board, Judge Sotomayor was more likely to send a person to prison than her colleagues. This was true whether the offender was a drug dealer or had been convicted of a white collar crime.’’ [The article appear as a submission for the record.] Senator SESSIONS. Well, on that subject, I would point out that the Washington Post study found that her criminal justice deci- sions were on the left side of the Democratic judges. Senator KLOBUCHAR. You know what, Senator Sessions. We will put both articles in the record. Very good. Senator SESSIONS. Good deal. Mine is already in the record. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Great. I just want to thank all of you. I know all of your thoughts were heartfelt and well researched. Es- pecially, thank you, Mr. Jeffries, for coming with a difficult situa- tion. I am so sorry about what happened to your brother. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00568 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 557 We are going to break for 5 minutes and then Senator Kaufman is going to be taking over this next panel, our last panel. Thank you very much. Senator SESSIONS. I would note for the record it is highly un- likely that I would be a ranking member and that Senator Kauf- man would be chairing this Committee. What a remarkable devel- opment that is. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Exactly. Just for everyone’s knowledge, Senator Kaufman was Senator Biden’s chief of staff for many, many years and took over his seat, and so now he is going to be chairing this Committee hearing. Ms. ROMERO. Madam Chair, if I may? Senator KLOBUCHAR. This is just a free-for-all. Ms. Romero, please comment. Ms. ROMERO. No, I’m not commenting. I was just going to ask to ensure that the longer statement can be submitted and inserted into the record. Senator KLOBUCHAR. Certainly. Everyone’s longer statements will be included in this record for all of the panels. So thank you very much. We will recess for 5 minutes and we will return. [Whereupon, at 6:57 p.m., the Committee was recessed.] After Recess [7:07 p.m.] Senator KAUFMAN. We will now call our final panel, saving the best for last, consisting of Patricia Hynes, Dean JoAnne Epps, Mr. David Rivkin, and Dr. Stephen Halbrook. Before we start, Michael J. Garcia was supposed to be here today but—be here for the hearing, but he thought it was going to be to- morrow. We all thought it was going to be tomorrow. Welcome to the Senate. You never know when things are going to happen. Without objection, what I would like to do is put his statement in the record. [The prepared statement of Mr. Garcia appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Also, Congressman Serrano is going to try to make it, but why don’t we do first—you know, as with in all the prior panels, all witnesses, as you know, are limited to 5 minutes for their opening statements. Your full written statement will be put in the record. Senators will then have 5 minutes to ask ques- tions of each panel. I would now like to ask the witnesses to stand and be sworn. Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give before the Com- mittee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Ms. HYNES. I do. Ms. EPPS. I do. Mr. RIVKIN. I do. Mr. HALBROOK. I do. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you. Our first witness is Ms. Patricia Hynes. Patricia Hynes is presi- dent of the New York City Bar Association, a former Chair of the American Bar Association’s Standing Committee on the Federal Ju- diciary. She is also a senior counsel of Allen & Overy, LLP. She was Assistant U.S. Attorney in the Southern District of New York and clerked for Judge Joseph Zavatt in the U.S. District Court for VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00569 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 558 the Eastern District of New York. She is a graduate of Fordham Law School. Ms. Hynes, I look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF PATRICIA HYNES, PRESIDENT, NEW YORK CITY BAR ASSOCIATION Ms. HYNES. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Kaufman, Rank- ing Member Sessions, and Senator Whitehouse. I am the president, current president of the Association of the Bar of the city of New York, and I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you this evening regarding the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to be an Asso- ciate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. I am joined this evening by Lynn Neuner, who is sitting right be- hind me, who chaired the Subcommittee of our Executive Com- mittee that conducted the evaluation of Judge Sonia Sotomayor. As this Committee is aware, the Association of the Bar of the city of New York is one of the oldest bar associations in the country, and since its founding in 1870 has given priority to the evaluations of candidates for judicial office. As far back as 1874, the association has reviewed and commented on the qualifications of candidates for the U.S. Supreme Court. It is a particular honor for me to participate in this confirmation process for this particular nominee. In May 1987, our association adopted a policy that directs the Executive Committee, our governing body, to evaluate all can- didates for appointment to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Executive Committee has developed an extensive procedure for evaluating Supreme Court nominees, including a process for conducting re- search, seeking views of persons with knowledge of the candidate, and of our membership of more than 23,000 members of the New York Bar and other bars. We evaluate the information we receive and express a judgment on the qualification of a person nominated to the U.S. Supreme Court. In 2007, the Executive Committee of the association moved to a three-tier evaluation system by including a rating of ‘‘Highly Quali- fied.’’ This is the first time the association has used the three-tier rating for a nominee to the Supreme Court. In evaluating Judge Sotomayor’s qualifications, the association reviewed and analyzed information from a variety of sources. We reviewed more than 700 opinions written by Judge Sotomayor over her 17 years on both the circuit court and the district court. We reviewed her speeches, articles, her prior confirmation testimony, comments received from members of the association and its com- mittees, press reports, blogs, commentaries, and we conducted more than 50 interviews with judicial colleagues, former law clerks, numerous practitioners, as well as an interview with Judge Sotomayor herself. The Executive Committee, on evaluating the qualifications of Judge Sotomayor, passed a resolution at its meeting on June 30th finding Judge Sotomayor highly qualified to be a Justice of the Su- preme Court based upon the committee’s affirmative finding that Judge Sotomayor possesses to an exceptionally high degree all of the qualifications enumerated in the association’s guidelines for evaluations of nominees to the Supreme Court, and those guide- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00570 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 559 lines are: exceptional legal ability, extensive experience and knowl- edge of the law, outstanding intellectual and analytical talents, ma- turity of judgment, unquestionable integrity and independence, a temperament reflecting a willingness to search for a fair resolution of each case before the court, a sympathetic understanding of the court’s role under the Constitution in the protection of personal rights of individuals, and an appreciation of the meaning of the United States Constitution, including a sensitivity to the respective powers and reciprocal responsibility of Congress and the executive branch. These guidelines establish a very high standard which, in our opinion, Judge Sotomayor clearly meets. Specifically, the associa- tion found that Judge Sotomayor demonstrates a formidable intel- lect; a diligent and careful approach to legal decision-making; ex- hibiting a firm respect for the doctrine of judicial restraint, separa- tion of powers, and stare decisis; a commitment to unbiased, thoughtful administration of justice; a deep commitment to our ju- dicial system and the counsel and litigants who appear before the court; and an abiding respect for the powers of the legislative and executive branches of our Government. We believe Judge Sotomayor will be an outstanding Justice of the United States Supreme Court, and I am very grateful to this Committee for giving me the opportunity to express the views of the Association of the Bar. [The prepared statement of Ms. Hynes appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you, Ms. Hynes. Our next witness is Dean JoAnne A. Epps. JoAnne Epps is the dean of the Beasley School of Law at Temple University, and she has taught at the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. She is here today to speak on behalf of the National Association of Women Lawyers, where she serves as the Co-Chair of the Supreme Court. Dean Epps, I attended Temple for one course. I am sorry I did not graduate. But I have enjoyed Temple basketball for over 50 years, so I am looking forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF JOANNE A. EPPS, DEAN, TEMPLE UNIVERSITY BEASLEY SCHOOL OF LAW, ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF WOMEN LAWYERS Ms. EPPS. Thank you very much, Mr. Senator. Senator Kaufman, Senator Sessions, Senator Whitehouse, I am really honored to be here this evening on behalf of the National Association of Women Lawyers, whose president, Lisa Horowitz, is seated behind me as I speak. And we are here today to urge your vote in support of the confirmation of Judge Sotomayor to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court. After careful evaluation of Judge Sotomayor’s background and qualifications, the National Association of Women Lawyers, NAWL, has concluded that Judge Sotomayor is highly qualified for this po- sition. She has the intellectual capacity, the appropriate judicial temperament, and respect for established law and process needed to be an effective Justice of the Supreme Court. She is mindful of a range of perspectives that appropriately should be considered in rendering judicial decisions and, if confirmed, will clearly dem- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00571 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 560 onstrate that highly qualified women have a rightful place at the highest levels of our profession. We, therefore, encourage your vote in favor of her confirmation. Founded over 100 years ago, and with thousands of members from all 50 States, NAWL is committed to supporting and advanc- ing the interests of women lawyers and women’s legal rights. We campaigned in the 1900’s for women’s voting rights and the right of women to serve on juries, and we supported most recently this year the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. In all of the intervening years, NAWL has been a supporter of the interests of women. As such, NAWL cares deeply about the composition of the Supreme Court and ensuring that it includes the perspectives of all Americans, especially those of women, not just because most of our members are women, but because all of our members care about issues that affect women. NAWL’s recommendation today is based on the work of NAWL’s Committee for the Evaluation of Supreme Court Nominees. In eval- uating the qualifications of Judge Sotomayor to serve as an Asso- ciate Justice, special emphasis was placed on matters regarding women’s rights or that have a special impact on women. Eighteen committee members were appointed by the president of NAWL and include law professors and a law dean, appellate practitioners, and lawyers concentrating in litigation. I co-chaired this committee to- gether with Trish Refo, a partner at Snell & Wilmer in Phoenix, Arizona. We divided our committee work into two categories. Like others who testified here today, we read a large selection of Judge Sotomayor’s opinions, and we interviewed more than 50 people who know her in a variety of capacities. Those who were interviewed described Judge Sotomayor as open-minded but respectful of prece- dent, which is consistent with what we found in her judicial opin- ions. She is courteous and respectful to those with whom she has professional interactions, including those who do not occupy posi- tions of status or influence. She has treated litigants, attorneys, and court personnel—and, in particular, for our committee’s re- view, women in the courts—with the utmost respect and profes- sionalism both in and out of the courtroom. Those who have interacted with Judge Sotomayor in other capacity, both before and after she was appointed, describe her as a good colleague, a team player, and supportive of institutional goals. Our review of Judge Sotomayor’s writing included her majority opinions, concurrences, dissents, and opinions that she wrote or joined in that were reviewed by the Supreme Court. And from that review, we have concluded that Judge Sotomayor has consistently displayed a superior intellectual capacity, a comprehensive under- standing of issues with which she was presented, and a thorough and firm grasp of the legal issues that have come before her. Looking at the clock, I would like to move to the final point that we would like to say. NAWL supports the confirmation of Judge Sotomayor for the important message that it conveys. NAWL does not believe that Judge Sotomayor should be confirmed solely be- cause she is a woman or a Latina, but the fact is that Judge Sotomayor is, as ultimately we all are, a product of her experi- ences. And for her, those experiences include life as a woman and VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00572 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 561 as a Latina. Both perspectives will be welcome additions to this Court’s deliberations. As a Nation, we have come a long way, but we still have much to do. Women are nearly half of this Nation, but a mere one-ninth of the Supreme Court. The disparity in representation is not trivial in effect. In the legal profession, although women have comprised 50 percent or more of graduating law school classes for more than two decades, they continue to be markedly underrepresented in leadership roles in the profession. As of last year, women were only 16 percent of equity partners in the country’s largest law firms; 99 percent of the law firms in this country reported that their highest paid lawyer was a man. Just 23 percent of Federal district and cir- cuit court judges were women. Just 1.9 percent of all law firm part- ners were women of color. And 19 percent of the Nation’s law firms have not one lawyer of color. Your confirmation of Judge Sotomayor will, therefore, send a strong message to law firms, corporations, Government, and aca- demia that we must and can eliminate the persistent barriers to the advancement of women attorneys. It will reinforce what should be a standard expectation: that women of diverse ethnic back- grounds should, of course, occupy positions of parity with men. As others have said this week, I long for the day when it would not even occur to anyone to mention Judge Sotomayor’s gender or ethnicity, those matters having become non-noteworthy. But that time is not yet here. With this vote, you will send a message, most especially to the wonderful women and girls in your life, telling them not just that they matter but that issues of concern to them matter. In summary, NAWL, the National Association of Women Law- yers, found Judge Sotomayor eminently qualified for this position, but not simply because she is a woman. She has the intellectual capacity, the appropriate judicial temperament, and respect for es- tablished law and process to be an outstanding Supreme Court Jus- tice. She is mindful of the human component of law and symbolizes the triumph of intelligence, hard work, and compassion. Accord- ingly, NAWL strongly supports her confirmation and urges you to vote in favor of her. Thank you very much for the opportunity to be here today. [The prepared statement of Ms. Epps appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you, Dean Epps. Our next witness is the Honorable Jose´ E. Serrano. Congressman Serrano, will you please stand and be sworn? Do you swear that the testimony you are about to give before the Committee will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Mr. Serrano. I do. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you. Representative Jose´ Serrano represents the 16th Congressional District of New York in the Bronx. He is an active member of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus and now is the most senior member of the Congress of Puerto Rican descent. Previously, Representative Serrano served in the 172nd Support Battalion of the U.S. Army Medical Corps and was a member of the New York State Assembly. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00573 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 562 Congressman Serrano, I look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF HON. JOSE´ E. SERRANO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Representative SERRANO. Thank you. And before you start the clock running, sorry I am late. I am Chairman of the Financial Services Appropriations Subcommittee. My counterpart is Senator Durbin, and we just passed our bill with 17 amendments, a motion to recommit, and a lot of issues that had nothing to do with my bill being discussed. Senator KAUFMAN. No one starts a clock on a member of the Ap- propriations Committee prematurely. [Laughter.] Representative SERRANO. You are well taken care of, Senator. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you. Representative SERRANO. Senator Kaufman, thank you, Senator Whitehouse, thank you, Senator Sessions. Thank you so much for the honor you have given me by inviting me to testify on behalf of Judge Sonia Sotomayor. Today I represent the proudest neighborhood in the Nation—the Bronx, New York. I cannot begin to describe the pride and excite- ment that my community feels to know that one of our own stands on the verge of a historic confirmation to the Supreme Court. Like you, I am often greeted by constituents on streets, at diners, after church services, where I cut my hair, at the local bodega or my fa- vorite cuchifrito stand. Usually, we talk about a personal or con- gressional issue or simply a friendly greeting. Now they just talk about Sonia. They speak about her as if she was a member of their own per- sonal family, about their pride in her accomplishments. They show a profound understanding of just how significant this nomination is and how it proves that in our country everything is possible. One of the best examples of the significance of this nomination is the number of people who are watching these hearings. In the Bronx, and in many communities around the Nation, folks have come together to share this moment. That is a clear sign of the pride and joy that they feel. Back home, believe me, it is a celebra- tion. Like the nominee, my family moved from Puerto Rico to New York. Like her, I grew up in a public housing project in the Bronx. Like her family, we also struggled in our new surroundings. It was tough in the Bronx, but we had dignity and our eye on a better fu- ture. One of the proudest moments of my life came when I was first elected to the New York State Assembly with my classmate, Sen- ator Chuck Schumer. As we were being sworn in, a friend said to my father, ‘‘Don Pepe, you are a lucky man. You have two children. One son is a school teacher, and the other is an Assemblyman.’’ My Pop, with that wonderful accented English, looked at him and re- plied, ‘‘I busted my back to get lucky.’’ I am sure that Judge Sotomayor and her mother have had many similar moments. We are living our parents’ dreams, enabled by their sacrifices and years of hard work. But our story is not unique to the community we come from. All around our great Nation there VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00574 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 563 are people working day and night, saving, doing without, all in order that their children could live the life that they want for them. Sonia represents the best of American culture. She comes di- rectly from the strand of our national character that says, ‘‘You can be anything you want.’’ It says, ‘‘Through hard work, you can reach the top in this country.’’ She is living proof that our dreams for our children are never impossible. When you invited me to speak, I wondered if my role here today was to tell you about her legal qualifications. Coming before you are many people who will speak to her work and the legal profes- sion. We know that she is highly regarded and that she has a deep understanding of the law and profound respect for the Constitu- tion. She comes before you with more Federal court experience than any other nominee in the last 100 years. You know, I quickly came to the conclusion that my role is to tell you about where she comes from, how she got to this point, and what this means for our country. We come from rough neighborhoods. We were surrounded by peo- ple making do on little. Sometimes there was desperation and de- spair. Around us were many distractions that could have taken us down a totally different road, but there was also ambition and peo- ple determined to make something of themselves. We came from a place where family comes first, where the core values are hard work and looking out for one another. As I moved out into the wider world, first through the Army and then in my political career, I learned that these were not liberal or New York or Puerto Rican or Latino values. They are American values. Bronx neighborhoods may not seem as similar to middle Amer- ica, but the values that we hold dear—family, freedom, looking out for the neighbors—are the same. Everyone watching this nomina- tion this week should know that based upon her background and ideals, they are in good hands with Judge Sotomayor. When I walk into the Capitol to work every day, I often stop and think how fortunate I am as a kid from a Bronx project to make it here. It is an incredible story that I have lived, but since she was nominated by President Obama, I have had to remember that my story pales in comparison to hers. In conclusion, this proud woman from the Bronx is perhaps the best and the brightest we have. She has risen to the top through her incredible intellect and hard, hard work. I know that her val- ues are your values and those of people around this country. Her story is my story. But her story is your story or that of your par- ents’ or your grandparents’. She will be a brilliant member of the Court, and I urge you to vote for her nomination, and I thank you for allowing me to show up late and for giving me this honor, which is one of the greatest I have ever had, to testify on behalf of this great woman. [The prepared statement of Mr. Serrano appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you, Congressman. It is our honor hav- ing you here. Senator SESSIONS. Congressman, thank you. That was a beau- tiful statement. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00575 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 564 Representative SERRANO. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. We appreciate it very much. Representative SERRANO. And with your permission—I do not know if it is allowed—I have some statements I have made about her in the past in 1998 and 1999 that I would like to submit for the record. Senator KAUFMAN. Without objection. Representative SERRANO. Thank you. [The statements appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Our next witness is Mr. David Rivkin. David Rivkin is a partner in the law firm of Baker Hostetler. Previously, he was Associate Executive Director and Counsel to the President’s Council on Competitiveness at the White House He also worked in both the Department of Justice and the Department of Energy. Mr. Rivkin, I look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF DAVID RIVKIN, ESQ., PARTNER, BAKER HOSTETLER, LLP, AND CO-CHAIRMAN, CENTER FOR LAW AND COUNTERTERRORISM, FOUNDATION FOR DEFENSE OF DEMOCRACIES Mr. RIVKIN. Chairman Kaufman, Ranking Member Sessions, I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify here today. Indeed, I am honored to be here. Let me begin, though, by noting briefly that I am appearing here on my own account and do not represent the views of my law firm, its clients, or any other entity or organi- zation with which I am affiliated. I am also not expressing a view as to how you should discharge ultimately your advise-and-consent function. Without a doubt, Judge Sotomayor is both an accomplished jurist and an experienced lawyer. It is, nevertheless, critical that the Senate weigh her understanding of the judiciary’s proper role in our constitutional system before consenting to her appointment. In my view, it is particularly essential that the Senate probe her views on the proper judicial handling of national security cases. This is the case for two distinct reasons. First, the United States remains engaged in a protracted global war against al Qaeda and the Taliban. Winning this war is essen- tial to our country, and its conduct has presented novel legal chal- lenges rarely seen in previous conflicts. Second, despite Judge Sotomayor’s long and distinguished service on the Federal bench, she has not had the occasion to consider many cases in the national security area. Therefore, the central topic of the Committee’s inquiry should be Judge Sotomayor’s un- derstanding of the proper role of Article III courts vis-a-vis the ex- ecutive and legislative branches in the area of national defense. To the extent that these hearings in your judgment have not produced sufficient information regarding her views in this area, I would urge the Committee to pose written questions to her. As you know, Congress and the President have traditionally been accorded near plenary authority in the national defense and foreign policy arenas, particularly when the conduct of armed conflict is in- volved. In recent years, however, the Supreme Court has dramati- cally expanded its role in these areas. In my view, this has signifi- cant implications for our Government’s ability to prevent another VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00576 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 565 devastating attack on the United States and be able to win this war. Indeed, there can be little doubt that the principles the Supreme Court has developed since Hamdi v. Rumsfeld was decided in 2004 make it far more difficult for the United States to defeat any enemy that resorts to unconventional warfare. For example, the Supreme Court has imposed what has proven to be an unworkable habeas corpus regime with regard to the de- tainees now held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Meanwhile, the lower courts have begun the process of extending this habeas regime to individuals captured and held by the United States in other parts of the world, particularly at the Bagram Air Force Base in Afghanistan. This development threatens our ability to wage war in the Afghan theater in general and presents prob- lems for operations of our special forces in particular. I want to emphasize that this judicial activism was not prompted by, nor even exclusively directed at, the previous administration’s allegedly exaggerated view of executive power. To begin with, the Bush administration’s use of Presidential powers, in my view, was far more modest than that of any previous wartime American President. Second, in striking the key parts of the Military Commissions Act of 2006 in the 2008 Boumediene case, the Supreme Court in- vaded the constitutional prerogatives of both political branches. The Court’s majority did not seem to be particularly troubled by the fact that Congress and the President worked in concert at the very height of their respective Article I and Article II constitutional prerogatives as identified in Justice Jackson’s seminal Youngstown Sheet & Tube analysis. The substance of these cases aside, I am also troubled by some of the stated assumptions that seem to undergird this ongoing wave of judicial activism in the national security area. These as- sumptions basically are that the courts are the best guardians of civil liberties and that the extension of judicial jurisdiction over all national security issues would produce a superior overall policy for our Nation. This view is both a historical and profoundly at odds with our constitutional fabric. When Article III courts extend juris- diction over matters that are not properly subject to judicial juris- diction, they act extra-constitutionally. Such an action by the courts, even if cloaked in the high-minded language of individual liberty, is no better than any extra-constitutional exertion of au- thority by congressional or executive branch. As we address these issues today, I note that these concerns are now shared by both sides of the aisle. Despite criticizing President Bush’s wartime policies during last year’s campaign, President Obama has continued virtually all of them. His administration’s litigation strategy on all of the pending key national security issues is identical to that of his predecessor. This is especially true with regard to the detention of captured enemy combatants without trial outside of the United States. His policies will continue to be challenged in the courts, and the Supreme Court is certain to play a central part in determining what those policies should be. If Judge Sotomayor is confirmed, her rulings will have immense consequences for our country’s safety VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00577 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 566 and security. I believe the Senate owes it to the American people to engage her on these issues fully and openly. I thank you for the opportunity to share my views with the Com- mittee, and I look forward to your questions. [The prepared statement of Mr. Rivkin appear as a submission for the record.] Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you, Mr. Rivkin. Our final witness in this panel is Dr. Stephen Halbrook. Dr. Ste- phen Halbrook has practiced law for over 30 years and has au- thored or edited seven books and numerous articles on the Second Amendment. Most recently, he drafted the amicus brief for the Su- preme Court case District of Columbia v. Heller, which was signed by Vice President Cheney, 55 Senators, and 250 Members of the House of Representatives. He is a graduate of Georgetown Univer- sity Law Center. Mr. Halbrook, I look forward to your testimony. STATEMENT OF STEPHEN HALBROOK, ATTORNEY Mr. HALBROOK. Thank you, Chairman Kaufman, Ranking Mem- ber Sessions, Senator Whitehouse. We’ve learned that Judge Sotomayor ended the great baseball strike and we’ve learned that she was and she is a fan of the New York Yankees. However, in her decision in Maloney v. Cuomo, had the State of New York decided to ban baseball bats, it would be upheld under the rational basis test. Al Capone proved that you could bash out the brains of two colleagues with a baseball bat. Instead of banning one big piece of wood called a baseball bat, New York State banned two little pieces of wood connected by a cord called a nunchaku, and that’s what the court upheld in the Maloney case. But for our purposes, the issue is the decision in Maloney that the Second Amendment does not apply against the states through the 14th Amendment. The court relied—the only Supreme Court case relied on by Maloney was Presser v. Illinois, which simply held that the First and Second Amendments do not apply directly to state action. It was never raised whether the 14th Amendment in- corporated the Second Amendment through the due process clause. Presser relied on Cruikshank. Cruikshank relied on pre-14th Amendment cases deciding that the Bill of Rights did not apply di- rectly against the states. But we find out in Heller, the Heller deci- sion, footnote 23, that Cruikshank does not apply because it did not engage in the kind of modern 14th Amendment analysis that’s re- quired by the Supreme Court’s cases decided primarily in the 20th century that Bill of Rights guarantees, especially substantive guar- antees, apply to the states through the due process clause of the 14th Amendment. Despite that admonition in the Heller case, decided a year ago, the panel in the Maloney case did not say anything about the mod- ern incorporation analysis. Now, Judge Sotomayor did say yester- day that under Supreme Court precedent, the Second Amendment does not apply against the states through the 14th Amendment. That’s an inaccurate statement. The Supreme Court has never de- cided that issue. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00578 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 567 Now, there are pending before the Supreme Court two cert. peti- tions on that issue, NRA v. Chicago, which arose out of the Sev- enth Circuit, upholding the Chicago handgun ban, held that incor- poration had to be decided by the Supreme Court. That court was not able to do it. And Mr. Maloney has filed his own cert. petition and, in fact, he’s asked that. if cert. is granted in NRA v. Chicago, that his case be consolidated with the NRA case. Now, in her questionnaire, in response to this Committee’s ques- tions, Judge Sotomayor stated that ‘‘conflict of interest would arise from any appeal arising from a decision issued by a panel of the Second Circuit that included me as a member,’’ and she stated that she would recuse herself in that case. She has decided the issue now pending before the Supreme Court and, therefore, we would expect and we would hope that she would recuse herself if she is, in fact, confirmed. Now, another per curiam case that she participated in deciding, Sanchez-Villar, has disturbing concerns involving both Second and Fourth Amendment rights. That case held that the mere possession of a firearm gave rise to probable cause to search, seize and arrest the person in possession thereof. Apparently, under New York law, it’s a crime to possess a fire- arm and it’s only an affirmative defense that you have a license for it. In that case, the court stated that the right to possess a gun is clearly not a fundamental right. That was totally unnecessary to the decision. It upheld a convic- tion of an illegal alien for possession of a firearm. And the correct decision would be to say that illegal aliens don’t have Second Amendment rights, and, in fact, the court disregarded a Supreme Court decision in Verdugo-Urquidez, decided in 1990, which explic- itly stated that the people that the term ‘‘the people’’ in the First, Second and Fourth Amendments refers to are the members of our national community and not to aliens and not to illegal aliens. A third case I want to mention briefly, United States v. Cavera, an en banc decision by the Second Circuit, upheld a Gun Control Act prosecution and the sentencing under it. Judge Sotomayor wrote a dissenting opinion that I think is commendable. She made a statement that ‘‘Arbitrary and subjective consider- ations, such as a judge’s feelings about a particular type of crime, should not form the basis of the sentence,’’ and she explained in great detail the reason for that. That’s exactly the way the law should be interpreted and constitutional rights should be inter- preted, as well. I think she made the correct decision in that case. The question now is whether she will also take Second Amend- ment rights seriously, and that’s the big unanswered question. Thank you. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you, Mr. Halbrook. Congressman Serrano, you talked about your district and how people feel. How are young people growing up going to be affected by Judge Sotomayor being on the Supreme Court? Representative SERRANO. It’s amazing that you ask that ques- tion. And I assure the rest of the panel I did not give him that question. But I was talking to my chief of staff this morning, who VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00579 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 568 was telling me how many watching parties were taking place in my district this week. Watching parties, people come together with covered plates, they bring food and they watch. And the question that seems to be ris- ing out of the young people is, ‘‘What do I do to go to law school? ’’ Now, I don’t know if this country needs more lawyers, because you know the jokes about that, and I better stop, because I’m not a lawyer. But I believe that what it has done more than anything else—and it’s not just her being on the Supreme Court, but the ex- changes between this panel and the judge—is that people are be- coming more aware of law cases, of law issues. And so No. 1, I think it will invite young people to consider a legal profession. Second, the issue of pride is so important in your own life. When I was a young man, there weren’t many Puerto Ricans for me to look to in New York as successes. So I always looked to Ro- berto Clemente, the baseball player, who was such a dignified man and who insisted on being called Roberto and not Bob, and then later on said Bob was Okay. And I saw that growth and then his death was part of that dignity of that man. But now, it’s a different story. Now, there are some people who look to me. There are people who look to artists. There are people who look to other people. But in closing, let me just say this. Nothing that you can accom- plish in this country looks bigger than the presidency or the Su- preme Court. So, obviously, it’s going to inspire people to say, ‘‘I can do it.’’ And, in fact, she told you here, while she was answering some tough questions, that, in many cases, she was telling people, ‘‘You can make it. You can make it.’’ And there’s nothing more pro-Amer- ican than to say to somebody, ‘‘You can make it.’’ Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you. Ms. Hynes, how did Judge Sotomayor’s experience as a prosecutor and a commercial litigator affect your ruling on her qualifications? Ms. HYNES. Well, it just shows how well rounded she is. I was a prosecutor. Indeed, Bob Morganthau appointed me in 1967 and in those days, I was the one woman in that office of 100—I have a great picture of a sea of 100 men and I sit behind Bob, who was the boss. Right? And he started my career as he did Judge Sotomayor’s. I’ve had a wonderful career, but he gave me that op- portunity. And I spent 15 years in the prosecutor’s office and I went up through the ranks and became executive assistant. But when I left the prosecutor’s office and went out into practice on the defense side, you really get the appreciation that there are two sides to an issue. You really have to measure and judge. So I think it makes her more well rounded, that she’s seen the prosecution side, those issues, the tensions, you heard the rep- resentative of the police association. You have Louis Freeh, who we all worked with in that same office. So she has the appreciation of those tensions, but she also under- stands the defense side and she combines that with the commercial litigator, a prosecutor, a trial judge, and an appellate judge. She is VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00580 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 569 the total package. She is the total package and she has done it in the best possible way. And when I listen, as I’ve tried to do to all of the testimony, I think you just have to look at what her background is and her record. And after that, your question should be answered, because she has been a terrific example of someone who has very, very carefully applied the law and done what she thought was right. We are all proud of her. When I say I’m particularly proud to be here tonight for this candidate, it’s because in New York, we know the quality of the judging that we have gotten from Judge Sotomayor. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you very much. Dean Epps, based on your analysis of your organization of her record, how would you speak about Judge Sotomayor’s judicial temperament? Ms. EPPS. Thank you very much, Senator. We asked a lot of peo- ple who had the opportunity to appear before Judge Sotomayor, to appear as opposing counsel, to work with her as co-counsel, to be litigants before her, and we found universally that people thought she had an extraordinarily appropriate judicial temperament. That doesn’t mean that she’s not passionate, which we believe that she is. But in all responses, people described her as respectful, considerate and kind. And so on that particular issue, we were thoroughly satisfied that she has the temperament to be an appro- priate associate justice of the Supreme Court. Senator KAUFMAN. Thank you. Ranking Member Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you. Congressman, thank you for your eloquence. I just appreciate that very much. Ms. Hynes, your pro- fessionalism and approach is worthy of the New York Bar Associa- tion. I agree with you, from the beginning, that her experience is really the rich kind of experience, almost an ideal experience for any Federal appellate judge. We have wrestled with a lot of issues that are controversial in the legal system today and a lot of us care deeply about those things. We are worried about some of the things we see in the courts. So that affects how you approach a nominee. But her back- ground and her integrity is exceptional and I appreciate that. Ms. Epps, thank you for your testimony. Mr. Rivkin, I just want to take a minute, because I guess Senator Lindsey Graham asked some questions about national security issues. You know that Congress and the President have traditionally been accorded near plenary authority in national defense areas. That is, I think, consistent with the heritage of our country, up until very recent years, post 9/11 years. I call your attention to a case before the second circuit, Doe v. Mukasey, last year, and that is Attorney General Mukasey, former judge from New York, Mukasey, in which a three-judge panel that included Judge Sotomayor ruled, in part, that certain provisions of the Patriot Act were unconstitutional under the First Amendment. Specifically, the panel found unconstitutional the provisions of the Patriot Act allowing senior government officials to certify that the release of certain documents would endanger national security. The panel stated, ‘‘The fiat of a government official, though sen- ior in rank and doubtless honorable, cannot displace the judicial obligation to enforce constitutional requirements.’’ VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00581 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 570 Does that give insight into Judge Sotomayor’s approach to law? The opinion went on to state, ‘‘Under no circumstances should the judiciary become the handmaiden of the executive.’’ Mr. RIVKIN. I think it’s a troubling opinion, Senator Sessions. It may strike some people as a technical case. The panel was con- cerned with the fact that the certifications by senior government of- ficials had to be treated by the courts as conclusive expressed ab- sent a showing of bad faith, and this view that the scheme unduly displaces judicial power, that it makes judiciary a rubber stamp. And I find that surprising in a couple of ways. First of all, I don’t see how you can read the statutory language as establishing a rub- ber stamp in the context of a bad faith inquiry, let’s say, by the director of FBI in making the certification as to the national secu- rity consequences of the disclosure of this information. You can ask the director, ‘‘How did you make the decision? What facts did you look at? Was that something you did generically? Did you drill down on it? How often have you rejected such requests in the past? ’’ So it is a meaningful scrutiny—it’s a deferential inquiry, but it’s a meaningful inquiry. So I don’t understand, especially in a facial challenge, why would you dismiss it as unconstitutional in a few short sentences. Second, there is nothing unique about treating certifications by government officials as conclusive. There are numerous other crimi- nal justice contexts, including, for example, immunity orders aris- ing in the context of grand jury proceedings, or requests, for pen register information, where such certifications have been treated with enormous deference by the court. What’s interesting, from my perspective, Senator Sessions, is that, ironically enough, more deference has been shown over the years to these types of certifications in pure criminal justice cases (drug cases, health fraud cases), than in national security cases, even though, to me, the public safety concerns are far more pal- pable in a terrorism case and justify greater judicial deference to the executive. Senator SESSIONS. I have seen some of that in our Committee. Could you briefly give me this answer and see if I am correct? We have got a lot of people that contend that captured enemy combat- ants are entitled to habeas corpus. Even in our Committee, Senators have contended we denied ha- beas corpus. We have repealed habeas corpus. It is in the Constitu- tion. Why would you deny it to these captives? But is it not true that when the Constitution was written, it made provision for the habeas corpus, that it would never interpret it as applying to enemy combatants that were captured on the bat- tlefield? Mr. RIVKIN. And held overseas. That is absolutely right. That was the teaching of the post-World War II, Eisentrager case. That was something that never happened throughout 200 years of Amer- ican history. Yet the Supreme Court, in the space of four short years, has changed this and imposed a habeas regime to test the Executive’s military detention decisions. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00582 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 571 Senator SESSIONS. President Bush actually relied on the historic interpretation. He was criticized because the Supreme Court basi- cally changed the law later. Is that correct? Mr. RIVKIN. That’s correct. And the Bush administration merely followed the well established legal architecture, Senator Sessions. For anybody who has seriously looked at the case law, their legal positions were entirely reasonable and solidly anchored in binding precedent. It is Supreme Court that went away from it own opion decisions. What’s even more regretable, from my perspective, is that lower courts are now expanding this further. The biggest problem now is that the lower courts are then extending constitutional habeas to Bagram. Senator SESSIONS. And reading Miranda warnings, it appears. Mr. RIVKIN. Miranda warnings are now being roughly read when captering enemy combatants on foreign battlefields. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Halbrook, you wrote the brief on behalf of 55 Senators in the Heller case and your view, I guess, was ac- cepted. Is it true that the decision, the Maloney decision, that Judge Sotomayor was a member of the panel that ruled on it, and you have expressed concerns about it, is it not true that that case will need to be reversed or the Second Amendment does not apply to the states in any city in the country and state government could completely deny people the right to keep and bear arms? Mr. HALBROOK. Senator Sessions, the basic issue was, first of all, the meaning of the Second Amendment. In Heller, the court said it protects an individual right to keep and bear arms, including possession of a handgun in your home. And Judge Sotomayor’s answers to questions about that decision, by the way, this week, have been very noncommittal as to whether she agrees with the decision. She does recognize that it’s precedent, of course. And then the next issue is whether the Second Amendment ap- plies to the states through the 14th Amendment due process clause, like virtually every other Bill of Rights freedom, assembly, petition, free speech, press, unreasonable search and seizure, the right to counsel, the whole works. And it’s only logical, once it has conceded, it has held that it’s an individual right, that it would be considered an explicitly guar- anteed right in the Constitution. Being explicitly guaranteed nor- mally means it’s a fundamental right and the test of—instead of rational relation, the compelling state interest test would apply, like other fundamental rights. So that’s the issue that’s before the Supreme Court right now. Senator SESSIONS. Regardless of whether or not the precedent justified the decision in Maloney, and I think we can argue about that, but the point is that decision would eviscerate effectively the protection, the constitutional protection to keep and bear arms, if it became the Supreme Court opinion. Mr. HALBROOK. That would be correct. Senator SESSIONS. The Supreme Court affirmed that approach. It is going to need to reverse that approach or the Second Amend- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00583 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 572 ment is severely weakened and really eviscerated. Is that right fun- damentally? Am I exaggerating? Mr. HALBROOK. Well, most of the firearms laws—that’s correct. There’s 20,000 firearm laws on the books and most of them are at the state and local level, not Federal law. The Federal Gun Control Act has expanded greatly in the past years, but most firearms possession issues involve state and local law. And the ruling in the seventh circuit case in NRA v. Chicago and the ruling in Maloney is that the Second Amendment has no application to states and localities. So you could ban firearms. You could ban anything you wanted to ban. Anything that would be an arm, the Second Amendment just doesn’t apply. It would be a curious doctrine that here you have the fundamental right, protected in the Bill of Rights, to say that it only applies to the Federal Government. The 14th Amendment’s framers desired and intended that the bill of rights guarantees apply to the states through the 14th Amendment. And one of the big issues of protection was the right of freed slaves to keep and bear arms, because they were violated by the Black Codes that were enacted by the southern states after the Civil War. And to get rid of that kind of discrimination, to allow freedmen to keep and bear arms, to have free speech and to have all the other rights that are set forth in the Bill of Rights, that was the intent of the 14th Amendment and that’s the issue before the Su- preme Court now and that’s the issue that Maloney decided ad- versely. Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are very kind. Senator KAUFMAN. Senator Whitehouse. Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you, Chairman. Here we are with the last panel, last witness, last question or last questioner any- way. I do not want to cause undue trouble, but I would like to react to Dr. Halbrook’s testimony, which, first of all, I think was fine. You are very learned. You are outside counsel for the National Rifle Association. You are knowledgeable about their issues. You have won these cases in court before. Your advocacy was ardent, but also very polite and cordial. So I have no problem with what your testimony said. My concern is this, and I mention this in front of the ranking member, because he has been energetic on this point. There have been an array of witnesses who have made similar points and there has been an array of questioning, really almost nonstop questioning on Heller and Maloney. As I understand the history of this, for 220 years, the United States Supreme Court never recognized any individual right to bear arms. Just last year, a new conservative majority, by the barest of majorities, discerned, for the first time, a new constitu- tional right, individual right, to bear arms, which is fine. That is now the law of the land. But it applied only in D.C. So it applied only to Federal law. So the case itself never reached the question of the application of the individual right that Heller announced in its application to the states or, for that matter, to municipalities. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00584 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 573 And that is against a background tradition of fairly extensive regulation of firearms by states and municipalities, restrictions on felons in possession, regulation of permits to carry concealed weap- ons, sentencing enhancement for armed crime, prohibitions against unauthorized discharge of firearms in city limits and so forth, all of which are well established. Now, it could well be that when the Supreme Court is presented with an opportunity to discuss Heller and to evaluate whether it should be extended to apply against states and municipalities, that it may choose to do that. But it strikes me that that is presently an undecided question by the Supreme Court. And as you yourself said a moment ago, the question of the appli- cation of precedent in Maloney is one we can argue about. What I would hate to have happen here would be to create an atmosphere in which a Supreme Court candidate feels that he or she is going to walk into a volley of fire if he or she will not announce in ad- vance or signal in advance an intention to expand Heller beyond where it now is, where the law has never gone before. Maybe it should go there, maybe it will go there, but the point of fact is that at this point in time, it has not gone there. I believe there is a point at which it verges on unseemly lobbying of the nominee to send signals as to where she will vote when the inevi- table petition to expand Heller gets brought before the court. I do not think it is appropriate for her to decide that matter. I do not think her decision in Maloney is outside of the bounds of normal judicial precedent, particularly in light of the unique cir- cumstances of the Heller decision, the 220 years of having never discovered the right before, the limitation to Federal law by virtue of being a D.C. case, and the long history of state and municipal regulation of firearms without constitutional objection. So it seems to me that a cautious judge, small ‘‘C’’ conservative judge, would be inclined not to expand Heller at that point, but to make her decision within what she perceived the law to be at the time and then if the court wanted to further expand this new con- stitutional right, that would be the job of the court. But I hope that we have not, in the course of this hearing, begun to trespass into a point in which the message is being sent to Jus- tice Sotomayor or to subsequent nominees that they need to signal how they will rule on a case that the Supreme Court has not yet decided in order to achieve confirmation, because I think, again, that crosses a boundary between testing the credentials of a can- didate in a proper advise-and-consent and what is, I think, un- seemly and improper for the advice and consent process, which is to seek commitments in future cases or to lobby as to outcomes in future cases. I know that the ranking member feels very strongly about that this right should be extended and we will all have the opportunity in due course to make our views known. But I just want to point out that I think in this advise and consent process, there is a point at which making one’s point about something does trespass on un- seemly lobbying. I am not sure we have reached that point yet, but I think we are in that neighborhood anyway and I would hope that my colleagues, as they evaluate Justice Sotomayor, would take that into consider- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00585 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 574 ation and evaluate her based on her talents, her abilities, and not on her failure to give what I think would be an improper advanced signal as to how she might rule as a Supreme Court justice in Hell- er 2, whatever the case will be named. Senator SESSIONS. Well, you are a good lawyer and you make a good point. I would say two things. Senator WHITEHOUSE. We were both U.S. attorneys, so we argue with each other all the time. Senator SESSIONS. He is my chairman of the Courts Sub- committee. But two things I would say about it. Number one, it has been appropriate to ask nominees about cases they decided, and she has decided this case. And I think Senator Kyl made a good point. If her case were the one that goes up to the Supreme Court, certainly, she would recuse herself, would have to, I think, under the rules, and maybe even if another one with the very same issue comes up, maybe she should consider it. Number two, let me tell you what the average American thinks. Just reading the words in the Constitution, it says ‘‘Congress shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion or free speech.’’ It says Congress. That means the U.S. Congress. But that applies to the states. That has been incorporated. The Second Amendment says, well regulated militia, ‘‘the right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not be infringed.’’ So that one, all that stuff, it just seems to apply to the people. Senator WHITEHOUSE. I think the ranking member is a very good lawyer and he makes a very good argument. My only point is that the—— Senator SESSIONS. Maybe we ought to have the experts on that. Senator WHITEHOUSE.—Supreme Court has not accepted that ar- gument yet and until it does, it is an unanswered question. Again, I do not want to say that we have trespassed that point at this stage, but I do think that it is worth demarcating as we go through this advice and consent process. But there does come a point where it begins to look like we are pressuring candidates to reach a particular outcome and to make pledges about a particular outcome rather than simply evaluating the merit of their decisions. But your argument is very well made and it may very well pre- vail when that case comes before the Supreme Court. Senator KAUFMAN. I thank the panel. I have no further ques- tions. Senator SESSIONS. Mr. Chairman, it has been great to serve under your leadership. Senator KAUFMAN. This has been great. This is a great panel. Senator SESSIONS. Who needs Pat Leahy? Don’t you tell him I said that. [Laughter.] Senator KAUFMAN. I need Pat Leahy. All I need is Pat Leahy and a member of the Appropriations Committee. I want to thank the panel and, frankly, I want to thank all the panels. This is an incredible process. The ranking member said, when he first started, that this is an educational experience for the Amer- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00586 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 575 ican people. I have been dealing with this process for a long time and I really think that is true. People get to stop for a minute, look at our Constitution, look at the way our process works, and this is a wonderful week in which people came, they argued, they fought, just this last exchange. Everyone can say what they think. We had not just the members of the Senate, but Members of Congress, from the public. I just think it is a wonderful example of what a great country this is and how our Constitution works. I would also like to thank Chairman Leahy and Ranking Member Sessions for doing a very thorough hearing, being very open to let- ting people go where they go and, yet, still getting this whole thing done in record time. This is an incredibly important process. I believe, as a student of the Congress, outside of the decision to go to war, the decision of who is going to be on the Supreme Court is the single most im- portant decision that you make as a United States Senator, be- cause when you pick a member for the Supreme Court, you are picking someone who serves for life. If Judge Sotomayor is confirmed and serves in the court, she will probably be here long after this panel of Senators is gone, except for Senator Whitehouse. But anyway, I just want to thank every- body for doing that. The Chairman has left the record open until 5 p.m. Senator Sessions, anything you would like to say? This hearing is hereby adjourned. [Whereupon, at 8:04 p.m., the meeting was concluded.] [Questions and answers and submissions for the record follow.] [Additional material is being retained in the Committee files, see Contents.] VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00587 Fmt 6601 Sfmt 6601 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC