35 Judge, some of your opinions suggest that you would limit some of these constitutional rights, and some of your public statements that have already been mentioned suggest that you would invent rights that do not exist in the Constitution. For example, in a 2001 speech, you argue that there is no objec- tivity in law, but only what you called ‘‘a series of perspectives rooted in life experience of the judge.’’ In a 2006 speech, you said that judges can and even must change the law—even introducing what you called ‘‘radical change’’—to meet the needs of an ‘‘evolving’’ society. In a 2009 speech, you endorsed the use of foreign law in inter- preting the American Constitution on the grounds that it gives judges ‘‘good ideas’’ that ‘‘get their creative juices flowing.’’ Judge Sotomayor, no one can accuse you of not having been can- did about your views. Not every nominee is so open about their views. Yet many Americans are left to wonder whether these var- ious—what these various statements mean and what you are try- ing to get at with these various remarks. Some wonder whether you are the kind of judge who will uphold the written Constitution or the kind of judge who will veer us off course—and toward new rights invented by judges rather than ratified by the people. These are some my concerns, and I assure you that you will have every opportunity to address those and make clear which path you would take us down if you are confirmed to the Supreme Court. I thank you very much and congratulations once again. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you very much, Senator Cornyn. Senator Whitehouse. STATEMENT OF HON. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM RHODE ISLAND Senator WHITEHOUSE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Sotomayor, welcome. Welcome to you and to your family. Your nomination caps what has already been a remarkable legal career. And I join many, many Americans who are so proud to see you here today. It is a great country, isn’t it? And you represent its greatest attributes. Your record leaves no doubt that you have the intellectual ability to serve as a Justice. From meeting with you and from the out- pouring of support I have experienced both personally and from or- ganizations that have worked with you, your demeanor and your collegiality are well established. I appreciate your years as a pros- ecutor, working in the trenches of law enforcement. I am looking forward to learning more about the experience and judgment you are poised to bring to the Supreme Court. In the last 21⁄2 months and today, my Republican colleagues have talked a great deal about judicial modesty and restraint. Fair enough to a point, but that point comes when these words become slogans, not real critiques of your record. Indeed, these calls for re- straint and modesty, and complaints about ‘‘activist’’ judges, are often codewords, seeking a particular kind of judge who will deliver a particular set of political outcomes. It is fair to inquire into a nominee’s judicial philosophy, and we will here have a serious and fair inquiry. But the pretense that Re- publican nominees embody modesty and restraint, or that Demo- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 36 cratic nominees must be activists, runs starkly counter to recent history. I particularly reject the analogy of a judge to an ‘‘umpire’’ who merely calls ‘‘balls and strikes.’’ If judging were that mechanical, we would not need nine Supreme Court Justices. The task of an appellate judge, particularly on a court of final appeal, is often to define the strike zone, within a matrix of constitutional principle, legislative intent, and statutory construction. The umpire analogy is belied by Chief Justice Roberts, though he cast himself as an umpire during his confirmation hearings. Jeffrey Toobin, a well-respected legal commentator, has recently reported that—and this is a quote—‘‘[i]n every major case since he became the Nation’s 17th Chief Justice, Roberts has sided with the pros- ecution over the defendant, the state over the condemned, the exec- utive branch over the legislative, and the corporate defendant over the individual plaintiff.’’ Some umpire. And is it a coincidence that this pattern, to continue Toobin’s quote, ‘‘has served the interests, and reflected the values of the contemporary Republican party’’ ? Some coincidence. For all the talk of modesty and restraint, the right-wing Justices of the Court have a striking record of ignoring precedent, over- turning congressional statutes, limiting constitutional protections, and discovering new constitutional rights: the infamous Ledbetter decision, for instance; the Louisville and Seattle integration cases; the first limitation on Roe v. Wade that outright disregards the woman’s health and safety; and the D.C. Heller decision, discov- ering a constitutional right to own guns that the Court had not previously noticed in 220 years. Some balls and strikes. Over and over, news reporting discusses ‘‘fundamental changes in the law’’ wrought by the Roberts Court’s right-wing flank. The Roberts Court has not kept the promises of modesty or humility made when President Bush nominated Justices Roberts and Alito. So, Judge Sotomayor, I would like to avoid codewords and look for a simple pledge from you during these hearings: that you will respect the role of Congress as representatives of the American people; that you will decide cases based on the law and the facts; that you will not prejudge any case, but listen to every party that comes before you; and that you will respect precedent and limit yourself to the issues that the Court must decide; in short, that you will use the broad discretion of a Supreme Court Justice wisely. Let me emphasize that broad discretion. As Justice Stevens has said, ‘‘the work of Federal judges from the days of John Marshall to the present, like the work of the English common-law judges, sometimes requires the exercise of judgment—a faculty that inevi- tably calls into play notions of justice, fairness, and concern about the future impact of a decision.’’ Look at our history. America’s common law inheritance is the ac- cretion over generations of individual exercises of judgment. Our Constitution is a great document that John Marshall noted leaves ‘‘the minor ingredients’’ to judgment, to be deduced by our Justices from the document’s great principles. The liberties in our Constitu- tion have their boundaries defined, in the gray and overlapping areas, by informed judgment. None of this is ‘‘balls and strikes.’’ VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 37 It has been a truism since Marbury v. Madison that courts have the authority to ‘‘say what the law is,’’ even to invalidate statutes enacted by the elected branches of government when they conflict with the Constitution. So the issue is not whether you have a wide field of discretion: you will. As Justice Cardozo reminds us, you are not free to act as ‘‘a knight-errant, roaming at will in pursuit of [your] own ideal of beauty or of goodness,’’ yet, he concluded, ‘‘[w]ide enough in all conscience is the field of discretion that re- mains.’’ The question for this hearing is: Will you bring good judgment to that wide field? Will you understand, and care, how your deci- sions affect the lives of Americans? Will you use your broad discre- tion to advance the promises of liberty and justice made by the Constitution? I believe that your diverse life experience, your broad profes- sional background, your expertise as a judge at each level of the system, will bring you that judgement. As Oliver Wendell Holmes famously said, the life of the law has not been logic, it has been experience. If your wide experience brings life to a sense of the difficult cir- cumstances faced by the less powerful among us: the woman shunt- ed around the bank from voicemail to voicemail as she tries to avoid foreclosure for her family; the family struggling to get by in the neighborhood where the police only come with raid jackets on; the couple up late at the kitchen table after the kids are in bed sweating out how to make ends meet that month; the man who be- lieves a little differently, or looks a little different, or thinks things should be different; if you have empathy for those people in this job, you are doing nothing wrong. The Founding Fathers set up the American judiciary as a check on the excesses of the elected branches and as a refuge when those branches are corrupted or consumed by passing passions. Courts were designed to be our guardians against what Hamilton in the Federalist Papers called ‘‘those ill humors, which the arts of de- signing men, or the influence of particular conjunctures, sometimes disseminate among the people . . . and which . . . have a tend- ency . . . to occasion serious oppressions of the minor party in the community.’’ In present circumstances, those oppressions tend to fall on the poor and voiceless. But as Hamilton noted, ‘‘[c]onsiderate men, of every description, ought to prize whatever will tend to beget or fortify that temper in the courts: as no man can be sure that he may not be tomorrow the victim of a spirit of injustice, by which he may be a gainer to-day.’’ The courtroom can be the only sanctuary for the little guy when the forces of society are arrayed against him, when proper opinion and elected officialdom will lend him no ear. This is a correct, fit- ting, and intended function of the judiciary in our constitutional structure, and the empathy President Obama saw in you has a con- stitutionally proper place in that structure. If everyone on the Court always voted for the prosecution against the defendant, for the corporation against the plaintiffs, and for the government against the condemned, a vital spark of American democracy would be extinguished. A courtroom is supposed to be a place where the status quo can be disrupted, even upended, when the Constitution VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 38 or laws may require; where the comfortable can sometimes be af- flicted and the afflicted find some comfort, all under the stern shel- ter of the law. It is worth remembering that judges of the United States have shown great courage over the years, courage verging on heroism, in providing that sanctuary of careful attention, what James Bryce called ‘‘the cool dry atmosphere of judicial determina- tion,’’ amidst the inflamed passions or invested powers of the day. Judge Sotomayor, I believe your broad and balanced background and empathy prepare you well for this constitutional and proper ju- dicial role. And I join my colleagues in welcoming you to the Com- mittee and looking forward to your testimony. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator Coburn. STATEMENT OF HON. TOM COBURN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM OKLAHOMA Senator COBURN. Thank you. Judge, welcome. It is truly an honor to have you before us. It says something remarkable about our country that you are here, and I assure you during your time before this Committee you will be treated with the utmost respect and kindness. It will not distin- guish, however, that we will be thorough as we probe the areas where we have concerns. There is no question that you have a stellar re´sume´, and if re´sume´s and judicial history were all that we went by, we wouldn’t need to have this hearing. But, in fact, other things add into that. Equally important to us providing consent on this nomination is our determination that you have a judicial philosophy that reflects what our Founders intended. There is great division about what that means. I also wanted to note that I thought this was your hearing, not Judge Roberts’ hearing, and that the partial-birth abortion ban was a law passed by the United States Congress and was upheld by the Supreme Court. So I have a different point of view on that. As I expressed to you in our meeting, I think our Nation is at a critical point. I think we are starting to see cracks, and the rea- son I say that is because I think the glue that binds our Nation together is not our political philosophies. We have very different political philosophies. The thing that binds us together is an innate trust that you can have fair and impartial judgment in this coun- try, that we better than any other nation, when we have been wrong, have corrected the wrongs of our founding; but we have in- stilled the confidence that, in fact, when you come before it, there is blind justice. And that, in fact, allows us the ability to overlook other areas where we are not so good because it instills in us the confidence of an opportunity to have a fair hearing and a just out- come. I am concerned, as many of my colleagues, with some of your statements, and I do not know if the statements were made to be provocative or if they are truly heart-felt in what you have said. But I know that some of those concerns will guide my questioning when we come to the questioning period. And you were very straightforward with me in our meeting, and my hope is that you will be there as well. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC