29 Senator SESSIONS. If I may, Mr. Chairman, since you brought it up. Chairman LEAHY. I yield to Senator Sessions. Senator SESSIONS. We had seven attempts to bring him up for a final vote and that was blocked. I think I spoke on his behalf more than any other Senator. I do feel like that it was a clear decision on the part of the Demo- crats. The objection over release of documents of course were inter- nal memorandum—legal memorandum that he had provided that the former Solicitor General said it was not appropriate for the De- partment of Justice to produce. Thank you. Chairman LEAHY. He should have had that hearing when the Re- publicans were in charge is what you are saying. Senator CARDIN. Once Senator Cardin is finished, we will take a 10-minute break. STATEMENT OF HON. BENJAMIN CARDIN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM MARYLAND Senator CARDIN. Judge Sotomayor, welcome to the United States Senate. I think you will find that each member of this Committee and each member of the United States Senate wants to do what is right for our country. Now we may differ on some of our views, which will come out during this hearing, but I think we all share a respect for your public service. Thank you for your willingness to serve on the Su- preme Court of the United States and I thank your family for the sacrifices they have made. I am honored to represent the people of Maryland in the U.S. Senate and to serve on the Judiciary Committee, as we consider one of our most important responsibilities, whether we should rec- ommend to the full Senate the confirmation of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to be an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. The next term of the Supreme Court that begins in October is likely to consider fundamental issues that will impact the lives of all Americans. In recent years, there have been many important decisions decided by the Supreme Court by a 5–4 vote. Each Jus- tice can play a critical role in forming the needed consensus in our nation’s highest court. A new Justice could and very well may have a profound impact on the direction of the court. Supreme Court decisions affect each and every person in our na- tion. I think of my own family’s history. My grandfather came to America more than 100 years ago. I am convinced that they came to America not only for greater economic opportunities, but because of the ideals expressed in our Constitution, especially the First Amendment guaranteeing religious freedom. My grandparents wanted their children to grow up in a country where they were able to practice their Jewish faith and fully par- ticipate in their community and government. My father, one of their sons, became a lawyer, state legislator, Circuit Court judge and President of his synagogue. And now his son serves in the U.S. Senate. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 30 While our Founding Fathers made freedom of religion a priority, equal protection for all races took longer to achieve. I attended Lib- erty School No. 64, a public elementary school in Baltimore City. It was part of a segregated public school system that under the law denied every student in Baltimore the opportunity to learn in a classroom that represented the diversity of our community. I remember with great sadness how discrimination was not only condoned but, more often than not, actually encouraged against Blacks, Jews, Catholics, and other minorities in the community. There were neighborhoods that my parents warned me to avoid for fear of my safety because I was Jewish. The local movie theater de- nied admission to African Americans. Community swimming pools had signs that said, ‘‘No Jews, No Blacks Allowed.’’ Even Balti- more’s amusement parks and sports clubs were segregated by race. Then came Brown v. Board of Education and suddenly my universe and community were changed forever. The decision itself moved our nation forward by correcting griev- ous wrongs that were built into the law. It also brought to the fore- front of our nation’s consciousness a great future jurist from Balti- more, Thurgood Marshall. Marshall had been denied admission to the University of Maryland Law School due to the color of his skin but went on to represent the plaintiffs in the 1954 landmark Brown v. Board of Education. And in 1967, it was Marshall, the grandson of a slave, who was appointed by President Lyndon John- son as the first African American to serve on the Supreme Court. The nine justices of the United States Supreme Court have the tremendous responsibility of safeguarding the framers’ intent and the guiding values of our Constitution while ensuring the protec- tions and rights found in that very Constitution are applied to and relevant to the issues of the day. At times, the Supreme Court has and should look beyond popular sentiment to preserve these basic principles and the rule of law. The next justice, who will fill Justice Souter’s place on the court will be an important voice on these fun- damental issues. It is my belief that the Constitution and Bill of Rights were cre- ated to be living documents that stand together as the foundation for the rule of law in our nation. Our history reflects this. When the Constitution was written, African Americans were considered property and counted only as three-fifths of a person. Non-whites and women were not allowed to vote. Individuals were restricted by race as to whom they could marry. Laws passed by Congress and decisions by the Supreme Court undeniably moved our country for- ward, continuing the progression of Constitutional protections that have changed our Nation for the better. Before the Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education that sep- arate was not equal, the law permitted our society to have separate facilities for black and white students. Before the Court ruled in Loving v. Virginia, a state could prohibit persons from marrying based on race. Before the Court ruled in Roe v. Wade, women had no constitutional implied right to privacy. These are difficult ques- tions that have come before the Court and that the Framers could not have anticipated. New challenges will continue to arise but the basic framework of protections remains. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 31 I want to compliment President Obama in forwarding to the United States Senate a nominee, Judge Sonia Sotomayor, who is well qualified for our consideration. Her well-rounded background, including extensive experiences as a prosecutor, trial judge and ap- pellate judge, will prove a valuable addition to our nation’s court. As a relatively new member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, as I prepared for this week, I considered a few key standards that apply to all judicial nominations. First, I believe nominees must have an appreciation for the Constitution and the protections it provides to each and every American. She or he must embrace a judicial philosophy that reflects mainstream American values, not narrow ideological interests. They should have a strong passion to continue the Court’s ad- vancements in Civil Rights. There is a careful balance to be found here. Our next Justice should advance the protections in our Con- stitution, but not disregard important precedent that has made our society stronger by embracing our civil liberties. I believe judicial nominees also must demonstrate a respect for the rights and responsibilities of each branch of government. These criteria allow me to evaluate a particular judge and whether she or he might place their personal philosophy ahead of the responsi- bility of the office. As this Committee begins considering the nomination of Sonia Sotomayor, I want to quote Justice Thurgood Marshall, who said, ‘‘None of us got where we are solely by pulling ourselves up by our bootstraps.’’ Judge Sotomayor is a perfect example of how family, hard work, supportive professors and mentors, and opportunity all can come together to create a real American success story. She was born in New York, to a Puerto Rican family, and grew up in a public housing project in the South Bronx. Her mother was a nurse and her father was a factory worker with a third-grade education. She was taught early in life that education is the key to success, and her strong work ethic enabled her to excel in school and graduate valedictorian of her high school. She attended Princeton University, graduating cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa, and she received the highest honors Princeton awards to an undergraduate. At Yale Law School, she was editor of the Law Review, where she was known to stand up for herself and not to be intimidated by anyone. Nominated by both Democratic and Republican presidents, for 17 years she has been a distinguished jurist and now has more federal judicial experience than any Supreme Court nominee in the last hundred years. This week’s hearings are essential. With some understanding of the context of Judge Sotomayor’s life and the role that she poten- tially is about to fill on the Supreme Court, I believe it is particu- larly important during these confirmation hearings to question Judge Sotomayor on the guiding principles she would use on reach- ing decisions. For example, it is important for me to understand her interpreta- tion of established precedent, on protecting individual Constitu- tional rights. I believe it would be wrong for Supreme Court Jus- tices to turn their back on landmark Court precedents protecting individual Constitutional rights. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 32 It is likely that the Supreme Court will consider important pro- tections in our Constitution for women, our environment and con- sumers, as well as voting rights, privacy, and the separation of church and state, among others, in coming years. The Supreme Court also has recently been active in imposing limits on executive power. It will continue to deal with the Constitutional rights in our criminal justice system, the rights of terror detainees and the rights of non-citizens. All of these issues test our Nation’s and the Supreme Court’s commitment to our founding principles and fundamental values. For this reason, we need to know how our nominee might approach these issues and analyze these decisions. Mr. Chairman, I look forward to hearing from Judge Sotomayor on these issues and I expect that she will share with this com- mittee and the American people her judicial views and her thoughts on the protections in our Constitution. Once again, Judge Sotomayor, I want to thank you for your pub- lic service and readiness to take on these great responsibilities for our nation. I also again want to thank your family for their clear support and sacrifice that has brought us to this hearing today. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you, Senator Cardin. After discussion with Senator Sessions, we will take a 10-minute break and come back. We are trying to figure out a lunch hour time. You have been very, very patient, Judge. One thing we will do in case the press wonders, there is a sign in front of you that has your name, which everybody knows here. It is angled in such a way that it is shining right in the eyes—no, don’t you worry about it. The sign will be gone. That will not mean that that is not your place when you come back. Thank you. We stand recessed for 10 minutes. [Recess 11:42 a.m. to 12:01 p.m.] Chairman LEAHY. Judge, you may have a broken ankle, but you beat me back to the hearing room. I am looking, Senator Sessions. It will be Senator Cornyn next. Is that right? Senator SESSIONS. Yes. Chairman LEAHY. Senator Cornyn, and then Senator White- house. Senator Cornyn. STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN CORNYN, A U.S. SENATOR FROM TEXAS Senator Cornyn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Sotomayor, you will recall Justice Jackson said of the Su- preme Court, ‘‘We are not final because we are infallible. We are infallible only because we are final.’’ Hence, the importance of these hearings and your nomination. I want to join my colleagues in extending a warm welcome to you and your family and, of course, join my other colleagues who have noted your distinguished career. As I have said as often as I have been asked about your nomination in the weeks since it occurred, I said your nomination should make us all feel good as Americans that people of humble origin can work hard, through sacrifice and love and support of their families, achieve great things in America. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC