48 tice Ginsburg for as long as you choose to stay, or God chooses to keep you there. Before I cast my vote on your confirmation, I would like to know how familiar you are with the issues I referenced, your inclination to learn more about them, and how you intend to go about deciding cases involving these issues. Indeed, on Indian country issues, I note in the papers that even the State of Connecticut has a dispute over Indian lands and Indian jurisdiction. Both Indians and non-Indians on or near reservations are eager to resolve some of these issues, and many of them go to the Su- preme Court. Through these specific issues, I hope to learn more about your general approach to the basic principles of judging, principles such as fairness and objectivity. There also are many issues that go to the Supreme Court regard- ing hunting and fishing rights, such as on the Missouri River. There are cases that go to the Supreme Court about the tribal courts, which are quite different from the U.S. Federal district courts. Indian cases significantly contribute to the work overload of Federal judges in my State. In the course of the next few days, I hope we can have a dialogue on issues of concern to the people in the West, but not only in the West, but throughout the United States, because everyone is con- cerned about these issues. And the Supreme Court ends up decid- ing more of them than Congress, perhaps because Congress is un- willing. Maybe I should criticize our own institution. In the interest of time, I ask unanimous consent to be able to submit the remainder of my statement for the record. I shall be asking many questions on Indian country jurisdiction. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, it will be entered in the record. I thank you, Senator. [The prepared statement of Senator Pressler follows:] PREPARED STATEMENT OF SENATOR PRESSLER Welcome, Judge Ginsburg. You and I share something in common—this is our first U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearing. I look forward to them very much, as I'm sure you do. Judge Ginsburg, you have a most impressive legal background. You are a pioneer in the field of gender discrimination. Your long line of legal victories has secured fundamental rights for both women and men. Your distinguished place in the annals of American law already is secure. The volume of your writings is astounding. My staff has filled nearly three dozen large three-ring binders to contain them. In reading your articles and decisions, one receives an education on a wide range of legal subjects. I commend you for the pro- lific contributions you have made to the law. As stated in my conversation with you in my office several weeks ago, I am very interested in how you would approach cases of particular interest to those of us liv- ing in the West. In my part of the country, many legal controversies arise over how the law of the land is applied to the use of the land. Environmental law, water law, hunting and fishing rights, mineral rights, access to public lands, private poverty rights, and cases and controversies arising in Indian Country—these are everyday issues that affect everyday people living in the West. The Court's treatment of these issues dramatically affect the way of life of the people of the West, including my home state of South Dakota. I certainly am not looking for your "position" on these issues. After all, you are not campaigning for an elected office. Nor are you a political appointee. You have been nominated to be a justice on the highest court of this land. We on this Committee and our colleagues in the Senate are charged with the re- sponsibility to confirm or not confirm you for this high office. Some writers have 49 commented that the Senate is the last opportunity for the people to have a voice in determining who shall sit on the nation s highest court. Supreme Court justices are appointed for life. Once you are seated on the Court, the American people will have to coexist with Justice Ginsburg for as long as you choose to stay, or God chooses to keep you there. The people will have no say about your tenure. Before I can cast my vote on your confirmation, I would like to know how familiar you are with the issues I referenced, you inclination to learn more about them, and how you intend to go about deciding cases involving these issues. Through these specific issues, I hope to learn more about your general approach to the basic prin- ciples of judging—principles such as fairness and objectivity. Over the course of the next few days, I hope we can have a dialogue on issues of concern to people in the West. I believe we can learn from each other in the proc- ess. Once again, welcome to this hearing. I look forward to your testimony. The CHAIRMAN. Judge, the floor is now yours. Again, welcome. Judge GINSBURG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Senator Hatch, and other members of the committee. May I say first how much I appreciate the time committee mem- bers took to greet me in the weeks immediately following the Presi- dent's nomination. It was a particularly busy time for you, and I thank you all the more for your courtesy. To Senator Moynihan, who has been at my side every step of the way, a thousand thanks could not begin to convey my appreciation. Despite the heavy demands on his time, during trying days of budget reconciliation, he accompanied me on visits to Senate mem- bers, he gave over his own desk for my use, he buoyed up my spir- its whenever a lift was needed. In all, he served as the kindest, wisest counselor a nominee could have. Senator D'Amato, from my great home State of New York, volun- teered to join Senator Moynihan in introducing and sponsoring me, and I am so grateful to him. I have had many enlightening con- versations in Senate Chambers since June 14, but my visit with Senator D'Amato was sheer fun. The CHAIRMAN. It always is. [Laughter.] Judge GINSBURG. My children decided at an early age that moth- er's sense of humor needed improvement. They tried to supply that improvement, and kept a book to record their successes. The book was called "Mommy Laughed." My visit with Senator D'Amato would have supplied at least three entries for the "Mommy Laughed" book. Representative Norton has been my professional colleague and friend since days when we were still young. As an advocate of human rights and fair chances for all people, Eleanor Holmes Nor- ton has been as brave and as vigilant as she is brilliant. I am so pleased that she was among my introducers, and so proud to be one of Eleanor's constituents. Most of all, the President's confidence in my capacity to serve as a Supreme Court Justice is responsible for the proceedings about to begin. There are no words to tell him what is in my heart. I can say simply this: If confirmed, I will try in every way to justify his faith in me. I am, as you know from my responses to your questionnaire, a Brooklynite, born and bred—a first-generation American on my fa- ther's side, barely second-generation on my mother's. Neither of my parents had the means to attend college, but both taught me to love learning, to care about people, and to work hard for whatever