2 Sotomayor. Then there is Corey, Connor—Corey and Connor Sotomayor. I shouldn’t have said—I should have said their last name first together. And the remainder of that row is filled with godchildren and dear friends. But this is my immediate family. Chairman LEAHY. Well, thank you very much. I remember read- ing about the marshals being surprised at your swearing-in as a district court judge because they had never seen such a large crowd of friends and supporters arrive. What we are going to do is each Senator will give a 10-minute opening statement. I would hope that all Senators would be able to be here today. If they are not, and if they want to give an open- ing statement, it will have to come out of their question time to- morrow. Senator Schumer will give a shorter opening statement than the others because he is going to reserve some of his time as a later introduction. OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. PATRICK J. LEAHY, A U.S. SEN- ATOR FROM VERMONT, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON THE JU- DICIARY Chairman LEAHY. I would note for the record we are considering the nomination of Judge Sonia Sotomayor to be a Justice of the United States Supreme Court. Our Constitution is interesting in this regard. We have over 300 million Americans, but only 101 peo- ple get a chance to say who is going to be on the Supreme Court: first and foremost, of course, the President—in this case President Obama—who made the nomination; and then 100 Senators have to stand in place of all almost 320 million Americans in considering the appointment. The President has done his part. He has made a historic nomination. Now the Senate has to do its part on behalf of the Senate people—on behalf of the American people. President Obama often quotes Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s in- sight that ‘‘the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends to- ward justice.’’ Each generation of Americans has sought that arc to- ward justice. We have improved upon the foundation of our Con- stitution through the Bill of Rights, the Civil War amendments, the 19th Amendment’s expansion of the right to vote to women, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the 26th Amendment’s extension of the right to vote to young people. These actions have marked progress toward our more perfect union, and I believe this nomination can be another step along that path. Judge Sotomayor.’s journey to this hearing room is a truly Amer- ican story. She was raised by her mother, Celina, a nurse, in the South Bronx. Like her mother, Sonia Sotomayor worked hard. She graduated as the valedictorian of her class at Blessed Sacrament and at Cardinal Spellman High School in New York. She was a member of just the third class at Princeton University in which women were included. She continued to work hard, including read- ing classics that had been unavailable to her when she was young- er and arranging tutoring to improve her writing. She graduated summa cum laude, Phi Beta Kappa; she was awarded the M. Tay- lor Senior Pyne Prize for scholastic excellence and service to the VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 3 university. I would mention that is an honor that is given for out- standing merit. After excelling at Princeton, she entered Yale Law School, where she was an active member of the law school community. Upon graduation, she had many options, but she chose to serve her com- munity in the New York District Attorney’s Office. And I might say parenthetically, every one of us who has had the privilege to be a prosecutor knows what kind of a job that is and how hard it is. There she prosecuted murders, robberies, assaults, and child por- nography. The first President Bush named her to the Federal bench in 1992, and she served as a trial judge for 6 years. President Clinton named her to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit where she has served for more than 10 years. She was con- firmed each time by a bipartisan majority in the Senate. Judge Sotomayor’s qualifications are outstanding. She has more Federal court judicial experience than any nominee to the United States Supreme Court in nearly 100 years. She is the first nominee in well over a century to be nominated to three different Federal judgeships by three different Presidents. She is the first nominee in 50 years to be nominated to the Supreme Court after serving as both a Federal trial judge and a Federal appellate judge. She will be the only current Supreme Court Justice to have served as a trial judge. She was a prosecutor and a lawyer in private practice. She brings a wealth and diversity of experience to the Court. I hope all Americans are encouraged by Judge Sotomayor’s achievements and by her nomination to the Nation’s highest court. Hers is a success story in which all—all—Americans can take pride. Those who break barriers often face the added burden of over- coming prejudice, and that has been true on the Supreme Court. Thurgood Marshall graduated first in his law school class. He was the lead counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund. He sat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit; he served as the Nation’s top lawyer, the Solicitor General of the United States. He won a remarkable 29 out of 32 cases before the Supreme Court. But despite all of these qualifications and achievements, when he was before the Senate for his confirmation, he was asked questions designed to embarrass him, questions such as ‘‘Are you prejudiced against the white people of the South? ’’ I hope that is a time of our past. The confirmation of Justice Louis Brandeis, the first Jewish American to be nominated to the high Court, was a struggle rife with anti-Semitism and charges that he was a ‘‘radical.’’ The com- mentary at the time included questions about ‘‘the Jewish mind’’ and how ‘‘its operations are complicated by altruism.’’ Likewise, the first Catholic nominee had to overcome the argument that ‘‘as a Catholic he would be dominated by the pope.’’ We are in a different era, and I would trust that all members of this Committee here today will reject the efforts of partisans and outside pressure groups that have sought to create a caricature of Judge Sotomayor while belittling her record, her achievements, and her intelligence. Let no one demean—let no one demand—this ex- traordinary woman, her success, or her understanding of the con- stitutional duties she has faithfully performed for the last 17 years. VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 4 And I hope all Senators will join together as we did when we con- sidered President Reagan’s nomination of Sandra Day O’Connor as the first woman to serve on the Supreme Court. There every Demo- crat and every Republican voted to confirm her. This hearing is an opportunity for Americans to see and hear Judge Sotomayor for themselves and to consider her qualifications. It is the most transparent confirmation hearing ever held. Her de- cisions and confirmation materials have been posted online and made publicly available. The record is significantly more complete than that available when we considered President Bush’s nomina- tions of John Roberts and Samuel Alito just a few years ago. The judge’s testimony will be carried live on several television stations and also live via webcast—something that I have set for the Judici- ary Committee website. My review of her judicial record leads me to conclude that she is a careful and restrained judge with a deep respect for judicial precedent and for the powers of the other branches of the Govern- ment, including the law-making role of Congress. That conclusion is supported by a number of independent studies that have been made of her record and shines through in a comprehensive review of her tough and fair record in criminal cases. She has a deep un- derstanding of the real lives—the real lives—of Americans and the duty of law enforcement to help keep Americans safe and the re- sponsibilities of all of us to respect the freedoms that define Amer- ica. Now, unfortunately, some have sought to twist her words and her record and to engage in partisan political attacks. Ideological pressure groups began attacking her even before the President made his selection. They then stepped up their attacks by threat- ening Republican Senators who do not oppose her. That is not the American way, and that should not be the Senate way. In truth, we do not have to speculate about what kind of a Jus- tice she will be because we have seen what kind of a judge she has been. She is a judge in which all Americans can have confidence. She has been a judge for all Americans, and she will be a Justice for all Americans. Our ranking Republican Senator on this Committee reflected on the confirmation process recently, saying: ‘‘What I found was that charges come flying in from right and left that are unsupported and false. It’s very, very difficult for a nominee to push back. So I think we have a high responsibility to base any criticisms that we have on a fair and honest statement of the facts and that nomi- nees should not be subjected to distortions of their record.’’ I agree with Senator Sessions. As we proceed, let no one distort the judge’s record. Let us be fair to her and to the American people by not mis- representing her views. We are a country bound together by our magnificent Constitu- tion. It guarantees the promise that our country will be a country based on the rule of law. In her service as a Federal judge, Sonia Sotomayor has kept faith with that promise. She understands that there is not one law for one race or another. There is not one law for one color or another. There is not one law for rich and a dif- ferent one for poor. There is only one law. And, Judge, I remember so well when you sat in my office, and you said that ‘‘ultimately VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 5 and completely’’ a judge has to follow the law, no matter what their upbringing has been. That is the kind of fair and impartial judging the American people expect. That is respect for the rule of law. And that is the kind of judge Judge Sotomayor has been. That is the kind of fair and impartial Justice she will be and that the Amer- ican people deserve. Judge Sotomayor. has been nominated to replace Justice Souter, whose retirement last month has left the Court with only eight Justices. Justice Souter served the Nation with distinction for near- ly two decades on the Supreme Court with a commitment to jus- tice, an admiration for the law, and an understanding of the impact of the Court’s decisions on the daily lives of ordinary Americans. I believe that Judge Sotomayor will be in this same mold and will serve as a Justice in the manner of Sandra Day O’Connor, com- mitted to the law and not to ideology. In the weeks and months leading up to this hearing, I have heard the President and Senators from both sides of the aisle make reference to the engraving over the entrance of the Supreme Court. I look at that every time I go up there. It is carved in Vermont marble, and it says: ‘‘Equal Justice Under Law.’’ Judge Sotomayor’s nomination keeps faith with those words. Senator SESSIONS. STATEMENT OF JEFF SESSIONS, A U.S. SENATOR FROM ALA- BAMA, RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY Senator SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for your leadership, and I believe you have set up some rules for the conducting of this hearing that are consistent with past hearings and I believe allow us to do our work together. And I have enjoyed working with you on this process. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you. Senator SESSIONS. I hope this will be viewed as the best hearing this Committee has ever had. Why not? We should seek that. So I join Chairman Leahy, Judge Sotomayor, in welcoming you here today. It marks an important milestone in your life. I know your family is proud, and rightly so. And it is a pleasure to have them with us today. I expect this hearing and resulting debate will be characterized by a respectful tone, a discussion of serious issues, a thoughtful dialogue, and maybe some disagreements. But we have worked hard to set that tone from the beginning. I have been an active litigator in Federal courts. I have tried cases as a Federal prosecutor and as Attorney General of Alabama. The Constitution and our great heritage of law I care deeply about. They are the foundation of our liberty and our prosperity, and this nomination hearing is critical for two important reasons. First, Justices on the Supreme Court have great responsibility, hold enormous power, and have a lifetime appointment. Just five members can declare the meaning of our Constitution, bending or changing its meaning from what the people intended. Second, this hearing is important because I believe our legal sys- tem is at a dangerous crossroads. Down one path is the traditional American system, so admired around the world, where judges im- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC