19 STATEMENT OF HON. RUSSELL FEINGOLD, A U.S. SENATOR FROM WISCONSIN Senator FEINGOLD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to wel- come and congratulate the nominee, Judge Sotomayor. I greatly ad- mire your accomplishments and your long record of public service. Let me also thank you in advance for the long week you’re about to spend in this room. The Supreme Court plays a unique and central role in the life of our nation. Those who sit as Justices have extraordinary power over some of the most important, and most intimate, aspects of the lives of American citizens. It is therefore not surprising at all that the nomination and con- firmation of a Supreme Court Justice is such a widely anticipated and widely covered event. The nine men and women who sit on the court have enormous responsibilities, and those of us tasked with voting on the confirmation of a nominee have a significant respon- sibility as well. This is clearly one of the most consequential things that one does as a United States Senator and I’m honored and humbled to be given this role by the people of Wisconsin. The ultimate responsibility of the Supreme Court is to safeguard the rule of law, which defines us as a nation and protects us all. In the past eight years, the Supreme Court has played a crucial role in checking some of the previous administration’s most egre- gious departures from the rule of law. Time after time in cases arising out of actions taken by the Administration after September 11, the court has said: ‘‘No. You have gone too far.’’ It said ‘‘no’’ to the Bush Administration’s view that it could set up a law-free zone at Guantanamo Bay. It said ‘‘no’’ to the Admin- istration’s view that it could hold a citizen in the United States in- communicado indefinitely with no access to a lawyer. It said ‘‘no’’ to the Administration’s decision to create military commissions without congressional authorization, and it said no to the Administration and to Congress when they tried to strip the constitutional right to habeus corpus from prisoners held at Guan- tanamo. These were courageous decisions, and in my opinion, they were correct decisions. They made plain, as Justice O’Connor wrote in the Hamdi decision in 2004: ‘‘A state of war is not a blank check for the President when it comes to the rights of the nation’s citi- zens.’’ These were all close decisions, some decided by a 5 to 4 vote. That fact underscores the unparalleled power that each Supreme Court justice has. In my opinion, one of the most important quali- ties that a Supreme Court justice must have is courage. The cour- age to stand up to the President and Congress in order to protect the constitutional rights of the American people and preserve the rule of law. I have touched on the crucial recent decisions of the court in the area of executive power, but we know, of course, that there are countless past Supreme Court decisions that have had a major im- pact on aspects of our national life. The court rejected racial discrimination in education; it guaran- teed the principle of ‘‘one person, one vote’’; it made sure that even the poorest person accused of a crime in this country can be rep- VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 20 resented by counsel; it made sure that newspapers can’t be sued for libel by public figures for merely making a mistake. It protected the privacy of telephone conversations from unjusti- fied government eavesdropping; it protected an individual’s right to possess afirearm for private use; and it even decided a presidential election. It made these decisions by interpreting and applying open-ended language in our Constitution. Phrases like ‘‘equal protection of the laws,’’ ‘‘due process of law,’’ ‘‘freedom of the press,’’ ‘‘unreasonable searches and seizures,’’ and ‘‘the right to bear arms.’’ Senator Feinstein just suggested these momentous decisions were not simply the result of an umpire calling balls and strikes. Easy cases where the law is clear almost never make it to the Su- preme Court. The great constitutional issues that the Supreme Court is called upon to decide require much more than the mechan- ical application of universally accepted legal principles. That is why Justices need great legal expertise, but they also need wisdom, they need judgment, they need to understand the impact of their decisions on the parties before them and the country around them, from New York City to small towns like Spooner, Wisconsin. And they need a deep appreciation of and dedication to equality, to lib- erty and to democracy. That is why I suggest to everyone watching today that they be a little wary of a phrase that they are hearing at this hearing: ‘‘ju- dicial activism.’’ That term really seems to have lost all usefulness, particularly since so many rulings of the conservative majority on the Supreme Court can fairly be described as ‘‘activist’’ in their dis- regard for precedent and their willingness to ignore or override the intent of Congress. At this point, perhaps we should all accept that the best defini- tion of a ‘‘judicial activist’’ is a judge who decides a case in a way you don’t like. Each of the decisions I mentioned earlier was un- doubtedly criticized by someone at the time it was issued, and maybe even today, as being ‘‘judicial activism.’’ Yet some of them are, as the judge well knows, among the most revered Supreme Court decisions in modern times. Mr. Chairman, every Senator is entitled to ask whatever ques- tions he or she wants at these hearings and to look at whatever factors he or she finds significant in evaluating this nominee. I hope Judge Sotomayor will answer all questions as fully as pos- sible. I’ll have questions of my own on a range of issues. Certainly, with the two most recent Supreme Court nominations, Senators did ask tough questions and sought as much information from the nominees as we possibly could get. And I expect nothing less from my colleagues in these hearings. I am glad, however, that Judge Sotomayor will finally have an opportunity to answer some of the unsubstantiated charges that have been made against her. One attack that I find particularly shocking is the suggestion that she will be biased against some litigants because of her racial and ethnic heritage. This charge is not based on anything in her judicial record because there is absolutely nothing in the hundreds of opinions she has written to support it. That long record, which is obviously the most relevant evidence we have to evaluate her, demonstrates a cautious and careful approach to judging. Instead, VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC 21 a few lines from a 2001 speech, taken out of context, have prompt- ed some to charge that she is a racist. I believe that no one who reads the whole Berkeley speech could honestly come to that con- clusion. The speech is actually a remarkably thoughtful attempt to grapple with difficult issues not often discussed by judges: How does a judge’s personal background and experiences affect her judg- ing? And Judge Sotomayor concludes her speech by saying the fol- lowing: ‘‘I am reminded each day that I render decisions that affect people concretely and that I owe them constant and complete vigi- lance in checking my assumptions, presumptions and perspectives and ensuring that to the extent that my limited abilities and capa- bilities permit me, that I reevaluate them and change as cir- cumstances and cases before me require.’’ Mr. Chairman, these are the words of a thoughtful, humble, and self-aware judge striving to do her very best to administer impar- tial justice for all Americans, from New York City to Spooner, Wis- consin. It seems to me that is a quality we want in our judges. Judge Sotomayor is living proof that this country is moving in the right direction on the issue of race, that doors of opportunity are finally starting to open to all of our citizens. And I think that nomination will inspire countless children to study harder and dream higher, and that is something we should all celebrate. Let me again welcome and congratulate you. I look forward to further learning in these hearings whether you have the knowl- edge, the wisdom, the judgment, the integrity, and yes, the cour- age, to serve with distinction on our nation’s highest court. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman LEAHY. Thank you very much. I will recognize Senator Kyl, the Deputy Republican Leader of the United States Senate. Senator Kyl. STATEMENT OF HON. JON KYL, A U.S. SENATOR FROM ARIZONA Senator KYL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would hope that every American is proud that a Hispanic woman has been nominated to sit on the Supreme Court. In fulfilling our advise and consent role, of course, we must evaluate Judge Sotomayor’s fitness to serve on the merits, not on the basis of her ethnicity. With a background that creates a prima facie case for confirma- tion, the primary question I believe Judge Sotomayor must address in this hearing is her understanding of the role of an appellate judge. From what she has said, she appears to believe that her role is not constrained to objectively decide who wins based on the weight of the law, but rather who in her personal opinion, should win. The factors that will influence her decisions apparently in- clude her gender and Latina heritage and foreign legal concepts that as she said, get her creative juices going. What is the traditional basis for judging in America? For 220 years, presidents and the Senate have focused on appointing and confirming judges and justices who are committed to putting aside their biases and prejudices and applying law to fairly and impar- tially resolve disputes between parties. This principle is universally recognized and shared by judges across the ideological spectrum. For instance, Judge Richard Paez VerDate Nov 24 2008 11:18 Jun 24, 2010 Jkt 056940 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\56940.TXT SJUD1 PsN: CMORC