46 TESTIMONY OF HON. RUTH BADER GINSBURG, TO BE ASSOCI- ATE JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES The CHAIRMAN. Judge, now you know, after hearing the click of all those cameras, why I am so popular with the camera persons here, because after lunch they will be banished from the well. I love them all, but after you introduce your family, we are going to take a moment to banish them from the well, so that when you make your statement, you are unencumbered by their smiling faces and the click of the camera. Would you be kind enough, Judge, to introduce your family to us. Judge GINSBURG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have such a large family with me today, such an extended fam- ily, not just the immediate people behind me who I will introduce, but my friends, my law clerks, my secretaries. My heart is over- flowing, because those are the people who have made it possible for me to be here today. But let me start with my nephew, Peter Stiepleman. The CHAIRMAN. Stand up, so we may all see you. Judge GINSBURG. My brother-in-law, Ed Stiepleman. The CHAIRMAN. Welcome. Judge GINSBURG. My wonderful sister-in-law, Claire Stiepleman. And one of my wonderful law clerks who is representing all the rest, Al Cacozza. My life's partner for 39 years, Martin Ginsburg. The CHAIRMAN. Welcome. Welcome. Judge GINSBURG. And my son from the great State of Chicago, James Ginsburg. The CHAIRMAN. That is what most Chicagoans think, that it is a State. Judge GINSBURG. And his very special friend, Lisa Brauston. The CHAIRMAN. Lisa. Judge GINSBURG. And my incredible daughter, Jane Ginsburg and Clara. The CHAIRMAN. Clara, you deserve an award so far today. Judge GINSBURG. She sure does, and, you know, people think I am very serious and sober as a judge, and so when I had all you people taking photographs of me in the White House, people were trying to get me to smile, and they said think of Clara. The CHAIRMAN. YOU have Clara smiling. Judge GINSBURG. Then my grandson, Paul Spera. I must tell you that, in preparation for these hearings, I have read briefing books, opinion books, law reviews, but there is no book in the world that means as much to me as this one. This is Paul's book. It says, "My Grandma is Very, Very Special," by Paul Spera. I thank you, Paul, for this wonderful book. The CHAIRMAN. I will tell you, Paul, the handwriting is good, the pictures are beautiful and you don't need a publisher. [Laughter.] Judge GINSBURG. It ends with a map of the United States of America. The CHAIRMAN. AS Senator Kennedy just said, he hopes your teacher is listening to this. Judge GINSBURG. And my son-in-law, George T. Spera, Jr. The CHAIRMAN. George. 47 Judge GINSBURG. And Christine, au pair from Belgium, who has been taking such wonderful care of the children. Then, on behalf of my cousins who I reckon by the dozen, Ste- phen Hess. The CHAIRMAN. Stephen, welcome. You have quite a family and we welcome you all here today. It is obviously a very proud moment for you, and this is a proud mo- ment for the photographers, because they get to stand and be seen on television as they walk out of the well. [Laughter.] Thank you all. While they are moving, I want those listening to understand I have not banished them from the hearing. They will recede into the various places for which this room was designed to be able to take their photographs, so they will continue to be able to do their job. One of our colleagues who has just arrived has a statement, and I will ask him whether or not he would prefer to deliver it before or after the nominee makes her statement. Senator PRESSLER. I apologize, Mr. Chairman. I was in the Com- merce Committee where I am the ranking member. We had an air safety hearing, and I went through a long morning. I will greatly summarize my statement. What do you prefer? What does the chairman prefer? The CHAIRMAN. That is fine, Senator, you go right ahead, and then we will go to your statement. OPENING STATEMENT OF SENATOR PRESSLER Senator PRESSLER. Welcome, Judge Ginsburg. You and I share something in common. This is our first U.S. Su- preme Court confirmation hearing. I am very much impressed with your legal background. You are a pioneer in the field of gender dis- crimination, and your long line of legal victories has secured fun- damental rights for both women and men. As stated in my conversation with you in my office several weeks ago, I am very interested in how you would approach cases of par- ticular interest to those of us living in the West. In my part of the country, many legal controversies arise over how the law of the land is applied to the use of the land. Environmental law, water law, hunting and fishing rights, mineral rights, access to public lands, private property rights, and cases and controversies arising in Indian country—these are everyday issues that affect everyday people living in the West. The Court's treatment of these issues dramatically affects the way of life of the people of the West, in- cluding my home State of South Dakota. I certainly am not looking for your position on these issues. After all, you are not campaigning for an elected office. Nor are you a political appointee. You have been nominated to be a Justice on the highest court in the land. We on this committee and our colleagues in the Senate are charged with the responsibility to confirm or not confirm you for this high office. Some writers have commented that the Senate is the last opportunity for the people to have a voice in determining who shall sit on the Nation's highest Court. Supreme Court Justices are appointed for life. Once you are seat- ed on the Court, the American people will have to coexist with Jus-