55 Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give before this Committee on the Judiciary of the United States Senate will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God? Judge ROBERTS. I do. Chairman SPECTER. Thank you. You may be seated. Judge Roberts, we compliment you on your patience in listening to 21 speeches, and the floor is now yours. STATEMENT OF JOHN G. ROBERTS, JR., NOMINEE TO BE CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES Judge ROBERTS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Sen- ator Leahy, and members of the Committee. Let me begin by thanking Senators Lugar and Warner and Bayh for their warm and generous introductions. And let me reiterate my thanks to the President for nominating me. I am humbled by his confidence, and if confirmed, I will do ev- erything I can to be worthy of the high trust he has placed in me. Let me also thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the members of the Committee for the many courtesies you have extended to me and my family over the past eight weeks. I am particularly grateful that members have been so accommodating in meeting with me personally. I have found those meetings very useful in better un- derstanding the concerns of the Committee as the Committee un- dertakes its constitutional responsibility of advice and consent. I know that I would not be here today were it not for the sac- rifices and help over the years of my family, who you met earlier today, friends, mentors, teachers and colleagues, many of whom are here today. Last week one of those mentors and friends, Chief Justice Wil- liam Rehnquist, was laid to rest. I talked last week with the nurses who helped care for him over the past year, and I was glad to hear from them that he was not a particularly good patient. [Laughter.] Judge ROBERTS. He chafed at the limitations they tried to im- pose. His dedication to duty over the past year was an inspiration to me and I know to many others. I will miss him. My personal appreciation that I owe a great debt to others rein- forces my view that a certain humility should characterize the judi- cial role. Judges and Justices are servants of the law, not the other way around. Judges are like umpires. Umpires don’t make the rules, they apply them. The role of an umpire and a judge is crit- ical. They make sure everybody plays by the rules, but it is a lim- ited role. Nobody ever went to a ball game to see the umpire. Judges have to have the humility to recognize that they operate within a system of precedent shaped by other judges equally striv- ing to live up to the judicial oath, and judges have to have the mod- esty to be open in the decisional process to the considered views of their colleagues on the bench. Mr. Chairman, when I worked in the Department of Justice in the Office of the Solicitor General, it was my job to argue cases for the United States before the Supreme Court. I always found it very moving to stand before the Justices and say, ‘‘I speak for my coun- try.’’ But it was after I left the Department and began arguing VerDate 0ct 09 2002 10:17 Oct 26, 2005 Jkt 023539 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\23539.000 SJUD4 PsN: CMORC 56 cases against the United States, that I fully appreciated the impor- tance of the Supreme Court in our constitutional system. Here was the United States, the most powerful entity in the world, aligned against my client, and yet all I had to do was convince the Court that I was right on the law, and the Government was wrong, and all that power and might would recede in deference to the rule of law. That is a remarkable thing. It is what we mean when we say that we are a Government of laws and not of men. It is that rule of law that protects the rights and liberties of all Americans. It is the envy of the world, because without the rule of law, any rights are meaningless. President Ronald Reagan used to speak of the Soviet Constitu- tion, and he noted that it purported to grant wonderful rights of all sorts to people, but those rights were empty promises because that system did not have an independent judiciary to uphold the rule of law and enforce those rights. We do, because of the wisdom of our Founders and the sacrifices of our heroes over the genera- tions to make their vision a reality. Mr. Chairman, I come before the Committee with no agenda. I have no platform. Judges are not politicians who can promise to do certain things in exchange for votes. I have no agenda, but I do have a commitment. If I am confirmed, I will confront every case with an open mind. I will fully and fairly analyze the legal argu- ments that are presented. I will be open to the considered views of my colleagues on the bench, and I will decide every case based on the record, according to the rule of law, without fear or favor, to the best of my ability, and I will remember that it’s my job to call balls and strikes, and not to pitch or bat. Senators Lugar and Bayh talked of my boyhood back in Indiana. I think all of us retain from the days of our youth certain enduring images. For me those images are of the endless fields of Indiana, stretching to the horizon, punctuated only by an isolated silo or a barn. And as I grew older, those endless fields came to represent for me the limitless possibilities of our great land. Growing up, I never imagined that I would be here in this his- toric room, nominated to be the Chief Justice. But now that I am here, I recall those endless fields with their promise of infinite pos- sibilities, and that memory inspires in me a very profound commit- ment. If I am confirmed, I will be vigilant to protect the independ- ence and integrity of the Supreme Court, and I will work to ensure that it upholds the rule of law and safeguards those liberties that make this land one of endless possibilities for all Americans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, members of the Com- mittee. I look forward to your questions. [The biographical information of Judge Roberts follows:] VerDate 0ct 09 2002 10:17 Oct 26, 2005 Jkt 023539 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 6633 Sfmt 6633 S:\GPO\HEARINGS\23539.000 SJUD4 PsN: CMORC