16 The Chicago Tribune strikes the same theme by calling Judge Scalia a "lawyer's lawyer: Meticulous, measured, determined to read the law as it has been enacted by the people's representatives rather than to impose his own preference upon it." It is interesting to note that many themes are repeated over and over by those examin- ing Judge Scalia's accomplishments. For instance, former attorney General Edward Levi calls Judge Scalia a "Lawyer's lawyer" and states that he "came to know, with awe, how his mind works, his mastery of the law in principle and in practice, his high integrity and commitment to fairness, and his openness to the careful consider- ation of differing views." Dean Guido Calabresi of the Yale Law School confesses that he has differed with Judge Scalia on many issues, yet he strikes many of the same themes: "I have always found him sensitive to points of view different from his own, will- ing to listen, and though guided, as any good judge should be, by a vision of our Constitution and the roles of judges under it, flexible enough, also as a good judge should be, to respond to the needs of justice in particular cases." This candid assessment verifies the report of the "Almanac of the Federal Judici- ary" that Judge Scalia is "highly respected in all categories, admired even by those lawyers who disagree with him. Over and over the same qualities are admired in Judge Scalia—his fairness, his integrity, his openness to varied viewpoints, his amazing mastery of the law. Judge Scalia is respected as a lawyer by lawyers, as a judge by judges. In the words of the American Bar Association, this committee is privileged to consider the nomination of an individual who "is among the best available for appointment to the Supreme Court." Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Senator Hatch. Senator DeConcini. STATEMENT OF SENATOR DENNIS DeCONCINI Senator DECONCINI. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I want to first not only welcome Judge Scalia, but I want to thank Chairman Thur- mond for the way he operated and conducted the hearings last week on behalf of Justice Rehnquist. I know that my colleagues and I have had, I think, an excellent opportunity to question the witnesses at length, going into any subject matter. I know there is great pressure to move these nominations along, but I particularly want the record to show my deep appreciation to Chairman Thur- mond in his fairness. Mr. Chairman, I realize as I am sure we all do, that an equal responsibility now lies with us in the hearings of the nomination of Judge Scalia for Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. Judge Scalia, if confirmed, will likely spend many many years on the Court, sharing an equal vote with the Chief Justice and the other Associate Justices. It is therefore our responsibility to keep up the steam, and fulfill our constitutionally mandated role of advice and consent on the nomination of Judge Scalia. Our job here is as important as the deliberation we took last week with respect to Justice Rehnquist. Indeed, Justice Rehnquist will remain as a voting member of the Supreme Court regardless of the final action of this committee and the Senate on his confirmation for Chief Justice. Judge Scalia, how- ever, is a new voice for the Court. It is of tremendous importance that we give this hearing our full energy and attention; let no one say that the Judiciary Committee ignored its duty to examine the President's nominee for Associate Justice. I must say that I am very pleased that the President has nomi- nated a person with the experience and credentials of Judge An- tonin Scalia. Clearly, we have before us a nominee with legal expe- rience, public service, academic experience, and judicial experience. 17 The American Bar Association has found that Judge Scalia meets the highest standard of professional competence, judicial temperament, and integrity. I am pleased to concur that he is indeed among the best available candidates for consideration. Judge Scalia comes to us from the D.C. Court of Appeals with an outstanding reputation. He frequently writes his own opinions without the aid of the first draft prepared by a clerk. He prepares extensively for his oral arguments, writing his briefs himself. He is clearly a man who will make his presence felt on the Supreme Court. He is a hard worker, but one who is personable. He has a great number of friends across the political spectrum of this town, and I am sure in each community that he has lived in. I take pride as an Italian American in noting Judge Scalia's her- itage. In this year that our country has shown so much pride in celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Statue of Liberty, we can take note of the contribution of Judge Scalia, the son of an Italian immigrant. He is but another example of immigrants who have risen to out- standing positions in our Government and served in the judiciary. As a first generation Italian American, Judge Scalia demonstrat- ed that the rapid assimilation of immigrants pumps strength and vitality into this great Nation. I wish to join my colleagues in extending a warm welcome to you, Judge Scalia. Regardless of your personal opinions on the op- eration of this branch of Government, I hope you look forward, as I do, to these hearings. There will be some tough questions asked of you and I am sure you will meet those questions head on, as you have in your past life, but I believe that you are eminently quali- fied for this position and will serve this country well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator MATHIAS. Thank you, Senator DeConcini. The distin- guished Senator from Wyoming. STATEMENT OF SENATOR ALAN K. SIMPSON Senator SIMPSON. Well, welcome to "the pit." I am privileged to welcome you here, and your fine wife and family. This is our role of advice and consent, a function we perform which is of great import and significance. I very much enjoyed my visit with you prior to these proceedings. I have come to have great respect for you when you appeared before this committee in 1982. I will not go on to relate your extraordinary background, which is most impressive to me. Your decisions are most impressive. I have actually read some of those, and it is marvelous—the way you have that ability to bring that remarkable brilliance to a form where the common person can understand. That is what the law is all about. What good are we as lawyers or judges if the things we do for our clients, or for a case, cannot even be understood? So I am impressed by that. Well, I would just share with you, that I missed a day or two of the action last week while I was mar- rying off the oldest son, and I assume that you have been watching the attempt at evisceration of William Rehnquist. The "great hunt- ers" have been out to tack the "pelt" of Bill Rehnquist on the wall of the den. Quite an exercise. It is like that old Clint Eastwood