Judge Scalia brings to the Supreme Court an unusually broad spectrum of experience. After graduating from Georgetown Univer- sity in 1957 and Harvard Law School in 1960, he launched a career in private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis in Cleveland, OH. In 1967, the State of Virginia became his home, when he ac- cepted a position as a law professor at the University of Virginia Law School, teaching contracts, commercial and comparative law. Judge Scalia has served as general counsel of the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy, and in the Justice Depart- ment as head of the Office of Legal Counsel. Prior to his appoint- ment to the circuit court of appeals, Judge Scalia returned to aca- demia at the University of Chicago Law School. Looking ahead to the docket facing the Supreme Court, it begins the first Monday of October. One of the great assets Judge Scalia brings with him is a willingness to face difficult issues head on, and he has had a long tradition of hard work. Finally, as the chairman pointed out, he has the ability to suc- cessfully manage, together with his lovely wife, a family of nine children. That indicates something about his temperament as a future Justice of the Supreme Court. From his experience as a teacher, private practitioner, a pub- lished author, member of the U.S. court of appeals, Judge Scalia represents the ideal combination of credentials for membership on our highest court. I thank the chairman. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished junior Senator from Virginia, Senator Trible. STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TRIBLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA Senator TRIBLE. Mr. Chairman, I, too, am pleased to join my col- leagues this morning in presenting to this committee Judge Scalia. Judge Scalia served with distinction as an attorney, as a teacher, and most recently as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. As a scholar and as a judge, he has demon- strated a rigorous intellect and a mastery of the tradition of Ameri- can law. He will bring those same qualities to the Supreme Court. I have no doubt that Judge Scalia will build a long and distinguished record of service to the Court and to our Nation. I urge this committee act promptly and positively for this nomi- nation. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from New York, Sena- tor D'Amato. STATEMENT OF ALFONSE D'AMATO, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Senator D'AMATO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to ask, Mr. Chairman, that the full text of my remarks be included in the record as if read. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, that will be done. [Statement follows:]