Judge Scalia brings to the Supreme Court an unusually broad spectrum of experience. After graduating from Georgetown Univer- sity in 1957 and Harvard Law School in 1960, he launched a career in private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis in Cleveland, OH. In 1967, the State of Virginia became his home, when he ac- cepted a position as a law professor at the University of Virginia Law School, teaching contracts, commercial and comparative law. Judge Scalia has served as general counsel of the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy, and in the Justice Depart- ment as head of the Office of Legal Counsel. Prior to his appoint- ment to the circuit court of appeals, Judge Scalia returned to aca- demia at the University of Chicago Law School. Looking ahead to the docket facing the Supreme Court, it begins the first Monday of October. One of the great assets Judge Scalia brings with him is a willingness to face difficult issues head on, and he has had a long tradition of hard work. Finally, as the chairman pointed out, he has the ability to suc- cessfully manage, together with his lovely wife, a family of nine children. That indicates something about his temperament as a future Justice of the Supreme Court. From his experience as a teacher, private practitioner, a pub- lished author, member of the U.S. court of appeals, Judge Scalia represents the ideal combination of credentials for membership on our highest court. I thank the chairman. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished junior Senator from Virginia, Senator Trible. STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TRIBLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA Senator TRIBLE. Mr. Chairman, I, too, am pleased to join my col- leagues this morning in presenting to this committee Judge Scalia. Judge Scalia served with distinction as an attorney, as a teacher, and most recently as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. As a scholar and as a judge, he has demon- strated a rigorous intellect and a mastery of the tradition of Ameri- can law. He will bring those same qualities to the Supreme Court. I have no doubt that Judge Scalia will build a long and distinguished record of service to the Court and to our Nation. I urge this committee act promptly and positively for this nomi- nation. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from New York, Sena- tor D'Amato. STATEMENT OF ALFONSE D'AMATO, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Senator D'AMATO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to ask, Mr. Chairman, that the full text of my remarks be included in the record as if read. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, that will be done. [Statement follows:] PREPARED STATEMENT BY SENATOR ALFONSE D'AMATO INTRODUCING DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA COURT OF APPEALS JUDGE ANTONIN SCALIA Mr. Chairman, it is a great honor and pleasure for me to introduce to you and to this Committee Judge Antonin Scalia as the President's nominee to be a Justice of the United States Supreme Court. It is a source of great pride to all Americans, and particularly to all Americans of Italian descent, that this brilliant son of an immigrant is being nominated to our nation's highest court. Judge Antonin Scalia is the first Italian American ever nom- inated to the Supreme Court. Judge Scalia's father came to this country through Ellis Island, as did so many millions of our ancestors. His grandfather brought his family to America seeking only the opportunity to work hard and to make a better life for his family. When Judge Scalia's father became a professor of Romance Languages at Brook- lyn College, he moved his family to Elmhurst, in Queens, New York. Antonin Scalia attended High School at St. Francis Xavier Academy in New York City. He attend- ed Georgetown University, and graduated first in his class, summa cum laude. At Harvard Law School, he was Note Editor of the Law Review. He graduated from Harvard, magna cum laude, in 1960. Antonin Scalia has excelled at every area of the law to which he has turned his attention. After practicing with a well known Cleveland law firm, he taught at the University of Virginia for three years. In 1974, he was chosen to be Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Legal Counsel—the office which is responsible for providing legal advice to the President. Serving under Attorney General Edward Levi, he demonstrated the brilliance, inde- pendence of thought, and great persuasiveness that have marked his entire career. Judge Scalia has been a distinguished professor of law at several of our nation's, great law schools: the University of Virginia, Georgetown, Stanford, and the Univer- sity of Chicago. He has served on the United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia since 1982. He is universally admired by his colleagues and by the attor- neys who appear before him. All cite his extraordinary intellectual ability, and his exceptional honesty, fairness, and integrity. Litigators describe him as phenomenal- ly well prepared, and possessed of an exceptionally keen analytical mind. The fate of his written opinions attest to the excellence of this nominee. His opin- ions have fared exceptionally well before the Supreme Court. Only twice has the Supreme Court failed to endorse his opinions after giving full-scale review. Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, I submit to you that Justice-designate Scalia has earned the great honor the President has conferred upon him. I am confi- dent that Judge Scalia will be outstanding, not only as the first Italian-American Justice to serve on the Supreme Court, but as one of the greatest justices of any background to serve on that Court. It is indeed a great honor to present this most able and distinguished nominee to you and to this Committee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. ANTONIN SCALIA 1. Birth: Born March 11,1936, in Trenton, New Jersey. 2. Marriage: Married to Maureen McCarthy, Sept. 10, 1960; nine children (Ann Forrest, Eugene, John Francis, Catherine Elisabeth, Mary Clare, Paul David, Mat- thew, Christopher James, and Margaret Jane). 3. Education: Georgetown University and University of Fribourg (Switzerland), A.B., 1957; Harvard Law School, LL.B., 1960; Harvard Law Review: Sheldon Fellow, Harvard University, 1960-61. 4. Bar: Admitted to practice in Ohio (1962) and Virginia (1970). 5. Experience: In private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley and Reavis, Cleveland, Ohio, 1961-67; professor of law, University of Virginia Law School, 1967-74 (on leave 1971-74); General Counsel, Office of Telecommunications Policy, Executive Office of the President, 1971-72; Chairman, Administrative Conference of the United States, 1972-74; Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel, Depart- ment of Justice, 1974-77; Scholar in Residence, American Enterprise Institute, 1977; Visiting Professor of Law, Georgetown University, 1977; Professor of Law, Universi- ty of Chicago, 1977-82; Visiting Professor of Law, Stanford University, 1980-81; Editor, Regulation Magazine, 1979-82; Chairman, ABA Section of Administrative Law, 1981-82; Chairman, ABA Conference of Section Chairman, 1982-83; Board of Visitors, J. Reuben Clark Law School, Brigham Young University, 1978-81; Nomi- nated by President Reagan to U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit July 15, 1982, confirmed August 5, 1982, took oath and assumed duties August 17,1982. Senator D'AMATO. Mr. Chairman, it is a great honor and, indeed, a privilege for me to be here with my colleagues to present to you and to the committee Judge Antonin Scalia as President Reagan's nominee to be a Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. It is a source of great pride to all Americans, and particularly to all Americans of Italian descent, that this brilliant son of an immigrant is being nominated to our Nation's highest court. Judge Antonin Scalia is the first Italian-American ever nominat- ed to the Supreme Court, and it is a source of great, great pride to the Italian-American community. And Mama D'Amato, Judge, sends her best. Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator. Senator D'AMATO. Judge Scalia's father, Mr. Chairman, came to this country through Ellis Island, as did so many millions of our ancestors. His grandfather brought his family to America seeking only the opportunity to work hard and to make a better life for his family. When Judge Scalia's father became a professor of romance lan- guages at Brooklyn College, he moved his family to Elmhurst in Queens, NY. Antonin Scalia attended high school at St. Francis Xavier Academy in New York City. He attended Georgetown Uni- versity and graduated first in his class. At Harvard Law School, he was note editor of the Law Review and graduated magna cum laude from Harvard in 1960. Antonin Scalia has excelled at every area of the law to which he has turned his attention. After practicing with a well-known Cleve- land law firm, he taught at the University of Virginia for 3 years and, thereafter, had an exemplary career in the law as a professor, as a practitioner of the law and as a noted jurist. Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, I submit to you that Justice-designee Scalia has earned the great honor that the President has conferred upon him, and I am confident that Judge Scalia will be outstanding not only as the first Italian-American Justice to serve on the Supreme Court, but as also one of the great- est Justices of any background to serve on that Court. Indeed, it is a great honor for me to be able to present to this distinguished committee this very distinguished nominee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The CHAIRMAN. Thank you. We appreciate you gentlemen being here and speaking and introducing Judge Scalia. You are now ex- cused. Of course, you may remain if you care to. Senator Moynihan cannot wait. We will proceed with the distin- guished ranking member, Senator Biden of Delaware. STATEMENT OF SENATOR JOSEPH R. BIDEN, JR. Senator BIDEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Scalia, congratulations. Judge SCALIA. Thank you, Senator. Senator BIDEN. On being nominated by the President, you and your family must be proud. They are a good-looking family, all of them.