was appointed to the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, which many call the second highest court in this country. A review of Judge Scalia's actions and record in these endeavors indicates he does possess the qualities to be a great Supreme Court Justice. In addition, those who have been associated with Judge Scalia throughout his life—even if they might disagree with him philosophically—consistently describe him as: A person who is open-minded, a consensus builder, and an individual with a keen intellect and sense of humor. These are unquestionably qualities we desire in a person who is to be elevated to the highest court in the land. Finally, Judge Scalia is now cast in the role of a symbol. Certain- ly, he creates great pride by being the first Italian-American who will sit on the Court. However, he also serves as a symbol in an even larger context. Judge Scalia, a first-generation American and the son of an immigrant, has been chosen by the President to be a member of the Supreme Court. By dedication and hard work, Judge Scalia has reached the apex of his chosen profession and stands as proof of the vitality of the American dream. Judge Scalia, we again welcome you to the committee, along with your wife, Maureen, and your family. And I believe eight of your nine children are here, are they not? Judge SCALIA. Yes, Senator. I do not know what happened to the ninth. He is supposed to be here, too. He is here. They are all here, Senator. I have a full house. I was worried about that. The CHAIRMAN. We have several Senators here to introduce you too, and we will hear from them and then excuse them. The senior Senator from Virginia, Senator Warner, in which State you reside. STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN WARNER, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA Senator WARNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and members of the committee. It is indeed a privilege to appear before this committee to represent and introduce this distinguished American who we are privileged to have as a resident of Virginia, together with his family. I would like to emphasize that Judge Scalia has long been a dis- tinguished citizen of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Indeed, his first teaching position was at my university, the University of Vir- ginia Law School. In 1982, President Reagan named Judge Scalia to the U.S. Cir- cuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Since that time, Judge Scalia has proven himself to possess the qualities essential for success as a member of the Supreme Court. He is respected by his colleagues as a brilliant legal scholar, as a man of impeccable ethics and integrity. Furthermore, Judge Sca- lia's judicial philosophy is rooted deeply in those strong principles upon which our Constitution was founded and existed these 200- plus years. He is a thoughtful, deliberate, gentlemanly scholar who has served throughout his public life with great distinction. Judge Scalia brings to the Supreme Court an unusually broad spectrum of experience. After graduating from Georgetown Univer- sity in 1957 and Harvard Law School in 1960, he launched a career in private practice with Jones, Day, Cockley & Reavis in Cleveland, OH. In 1967, the State of Virginia became his home, when he ac- cepted a position as a law professor at the University of Virginia Law School, teaching contracts, commercial and comparative law. Judge Scalia has served as general counsel of the White House Office of Telecommunications Policy, and in the Justice Depart- ment as head of the Office of Legal Counsel. Prior to his appoint- ment to the circuit court of appeals, Judge Scalia returned to aca- demia at the University of Chicago Law School. Looking ahead to the docket facing the Supreme Court, it begins the first Monday of October. One of the great assets Judge Scalia brings with him is a willingness to face difficult issues head on, and he has had a long tradition of hard work. Finally, as the chairman pointed out, he has the ability to suc- cessfully manage, together with his lovely wife, a family of nine children. That indicates something about his temperament as a future Justice of the Supreme Court. From his experience as a teacher, private practitioner, a pub- lished author, member of the U.S. court of appeals, Judge Scalia represents the ideal combination of credentials for membership on our highest court. I thank the chairman. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished junior Senator from Virginia, Senator Trible. STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL TRIBLE, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA Senator TRIBLE. Mr. Chairman, I, too, am pleased to join my col- leagues this morning in presenting to this committee Judge Scalia. Judge Scalia served with distinction as an attorney, as a teacher, and most recently as a judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. As a scholar and as a judge, he has demon- strated a rigorous intellect and a mastery of the tradition of Ameri- can law. He will bring those same qualities to the Supreme Court. I have no doubt that Judge Scalia will build a long and distinguished record of service to the Court and to our Nation. I urge this committee act promptly and positively for this nomi- nation. The CHAIRMAN. The distinguished Senator from New York, Sena- tor D'Amato. STATEMENT OF ALFONSE D'AMATO, A U.S. SENATOR FROM THE STATE OF NEW YORK Senator D'AMATO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to ask, Mr. Chairman, that the full text of my remarks be included in the record as if read. The CHAIRMAN. Without objection, that will be done. [Statement follows:]