725 Senator SPECTER. YOU were under considerable pressure and counter-pressure. The President announced his intention to submit the name of Judge Kennedy on November 11th and you started these hearings very expeditiously, and I think the conduct of the hearings showed that you were correct; that it was possible to do a thorough job. I believe that these hearings have been a credit to the Judiciary Committee and a credit to the Senate and a credit to the country. I think that the approach of getting into the record of judicial philos- ophy and the thoroughness of the committee is exemplary. Here we started shortly after 9:00 a.m. and we are concluding a few minutes before 8:00 p.m., and I think that is a tribute to your operation of the committee, Mr. Chairman. So I did want to stay to express my appreciation and compliment you on your fine work. The CHAIRMAN. Well, you are all very gracious. I appreciate that. I would just say for the record that the Senate schedule does impact significantly on when we can and cannot schedule a hear- ing. I must tell you, had the nomination come on October 15th in- stead of November 11th, I probably would not have held the hear- ings until now anyway. 1 believe that we are running at the lower end of the time we need when you are down around 30 days. That is enough time in most cases, but it is tough to get it done in that time. The more appropriate time would be somewhere on the order of 50 to 60 days, in my view. But with the Senate schedule, the Christmas holiday, and the Senate being out, as was indicated by others of my colleagues, the choice was to go now or not go until the end of January. And to be very blunt about it, we have other important matters, also. I have a very important responsibility on the Foreign Relations Committee on the INF Agreement, and the rest of us have similar responsibilities. I hope, on reflection, those who opposed us—and none of my colleagues on the committee opposed my starting at this time. I asked for a vote and they all agreed to start at this time, but I hope those who believe we started too early are satisfied by the thoroughness of the questioning and, I might add, the an- swers from Judge Kennedy. Well, with that, enough talking. We will stand in recess to the call of the chair. [Whereupon, at 7:50 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]