25 the people of this Nation and to the Constitution of the United States. I understand that as a professor, you concluded your class each semester with a quotation from Robert Bolt. I think it is appropri- ate to cite another of Bolt's quotations here, "The law is not a 'light' for you or any man to see by; the law is not an instrument of any kind. The law is a causeway upon which so long as he keeps to it, a citizen may walk safely." Judge Scalia, as a final arbiter of what the law is, keep that causeway forever straight, forever clear, and forever safe. Good luck. Senator SIMPSON [presiding]. Thank you, Senator Heflin. And now I believe Senator Grassley, the Senator from Iowa, please. STATEMENT OF SENATOR CHARLES E. GRASSLEY Senator GRASSLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me personally congratulate you again, as I did in my office, on your nomination to serve on the Supreme Court. By all accounts, you are an individual of great intellectual fire- power, the energetic scholar, full of thoughtful as well as thought- provoking ideas. Most recently, in your 4 years on the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, you authored more than 80 majority opinions and dozens of concurring and dissenting opinions. Your colleagues on the D.C. circuit, it is my understanding, have found a most reasonable and fair judge, congenial and easy to work with. This is the view even among those with a different philoso- phy like Judge Wald and Judge Mikva. It has been said that you especially enjoy the give and take of lawyerly dialog. This will make you well suited to the operation of the Court. Before your appointment to the court of appeals, you proved to be a formidable legal scholar at both the University of Chicago and the American Enterprise Institute. You have had nearly two dozen articles published. I also note that you are the son of an Italian im- migrant, and that has been played up, as it legitimately ought to, today. If confirmed, you will be the first Italian American to serve on the Supreme Court. Undoubtedly, this is a source of great pride in the Italian-American community, as it should be. I believe it is further evidence of our truly pluralistic society. In sum, from what I know about your intellect, experience, and abili- ty, it seems to me that President Reagan has made a wise choice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Senator SIMPSON. Thank you, Senator Grassley. And now the Senator from Illinois, Senator Paul Simon. STATEMENT OF SENATOR PAUL SIMON Senator SIMON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, if I may I would like to respond very briefly to my col- league from Alabama on the partisanship issue. I regret he is not here.